ZARQA, Jordan – U.S. Army Central deployed its contingency command post Sept. 5-8 to Exercise Lucky Strike 23.2 at the Joint Training Center in Zarqa, Jordan.
Consisting of approximately 100 service members and civilians from the USARCENT headquarters, the CCP is USARCENT’s rapidly deployable command element designed to provide command and control at any forward location in the U.S. Central Command region.
Exercise Lucky Strike 23.2 allowed the CCP the opportunity to develop standard operating procedures and interoperability before Exercise Internal Look, a CENTCOM coordinated command post exercise.
“The contingency command post is something that the theater Army is able to use for short duration operations and can be used in a variety of ways,” said Col. Jennifer Reed, the USARCENT G33 chief of operations. “One of the important things about bringing it into theater is that it puts us closer to both our partners and subordinate units.”
As an expeditionary headquarters, the CCP is designed to provide command and control operations, as well as military intelligence, logistics capabilities and other key functions. Lucky Strike presented a unique training opportunity to USARCENT as staff directorates tested capabilities in a partner nation.
The deployment of the CCP to a partner nation required meticulous planning and coordination. Leading the way for the CCP was its Headquarters and Headquarters Battalion, who provided life support and administrative services throughout the exercise.
“The Warrior Battalion is here validating the readiness for the force package for the CCP, which is the expeditionary command and control capability for the USARCENT headquarters,” said Lt. Col. Andrew Eagan, the USARCENT HHBN commander.
Overall, the command was pleased with the deployment and performance of the CCP during the exercise. According to Reed, the CCP’s deployment to Jordan was a necessary building block for future operations.
“I think it’s always going to be important for the staff to work together and develop interoperability with each other, our partners and higher headquarters,” said Reed. “It’s never easy to go on any type of field exercise, whether it’s at the platoon level or theater Army level, but the staffs from the participating/supporting units did a great job of working together and ensuring the event was successful."
Lucky Strike 23.2 was the second deployment for the USARCENT CCP in 2023. The CCP previously deployed to McCrady Training Center in August for Exercise Warrior Torch, in which personnel completed the tactical training and administrative tasks required to deploy overseas.
U.S. Army Central is the U.S. Army Service Component Command for U.S. Central Command and is responsible to the Secretary of the Army for the support and administration of more than 12,000 Soldiers, including those assigned to joint task forces and embassies, across the 21 countries in the CENTCOM Area of Responsibility.
