The EU’s Crisis Management Military Exercise - MILEX 23 has entered its second week at the Military Planning and Conduct Capability (MPCC) Operations Headquarters (OHQ) in Brussels.
Photo: Lt Col Felix Nieto from Concepts and Capabilities Directorate EUMS, briefs attendees on the MILEX 23 Exercise outline.
In collaboration with the Spanish Force Headquarters (FHQ) in Rota, Spain, and with support from other national Headquarters in Ulm, Germany and Larissa, Greece, the MPCC is exercising to test and validate the EU’s crisis management concepts, procedures, systems and tactics in order to make the EU more effective as a global security provider.
For the past 10 days military personnel in MPCC have been working together to finalise the operational plans for the second part of the exercise, the LIVEX, which takes place from the 16 to 22 of October 2023 in Rota, Spain. This addition of the LIVEX is a new departure in the MILEX series and is a significant milestone in the development of the EU’s Rapid Deployment Capacity (RDC) which is a key deliverable of the EU’s implementation of the Strategic Compass “live exercises in an EU framework, with the progressive involvement of the Military Planning and Conduct Capability will shape the EU Rapid Deployment Capacity in particular, and more generally will reinforce our posture, add to our strategic communication and strengthen interoperability, including with partners”.
On Wednesday 27 September, the Deputy Director and Chief of Staff of the MPCC, Major General Werner Albl, hosted the ‘MILEX 23 Observer Day’ which was attended by military personnel from non-EU Member States, NATO and international organisations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Major General Albl and his staff gave the attendees a general overview of the MILEX 23 exercise outline and scenario, followed by a detailed insight into the military planning process including the EU’s integrated approach and the crisis management process. Afterwards the visitors attended a daily Commanders Update Brief (CUB) and witnessed firsthand how all the information in the military planning process comes together.
The morning’s briefings were packed with information and helped to create a better understanding for those in attendance of the aim of MILEX 23 and the significance of LIVEX. The MILEX 23 Observer Day demonstrated to the attendees that the EU, through the MPCC, has the necessary military concepts, procedures and experience to plan and execute a mission, thereby enhancing further the EU’s military readiness to respond to external crisis and conflicts.
