DOCUMENT: 2FA0B45CA064AF09334944B6D68B5987
TEXT:
The Members of the Security Council are encouraged by the decision of Iraqi President Fuad Masum to nominate a new Prime Minister-designate.  The nomination of a new Prime Minister-designate is an important step toward the formation of an inclusive Government that represents all segments of the Iraqi population and that contributes to finding a viable and sustainable solution to the country’s current challenges.  The Members of the Security Council urge the Prime Minister-designate, Haider al-Abadi, to work swiftly to form such a Government as quickly as possible and within the constitutional time-frame.

The Members of the Security Council urge all political parties and their supporters to remain calm and respect the political process governed by the Constitution.

The Members of the Security Council reiterate their support for Iraq’s democratic process and their support for the Iraq people in their fight against terrorism, in particular against ISIL.
ENTITIES:
The Members of the Security Council: Organisation, Security Council: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi President Fuad Masum: Person, President Fuad: Person, the Iraqi population: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, a new Prime Minister-designate: Person, the country: Organisation, an inclusive Government: Organisation, The Members of the Security Council: Organisation, Security Council: Organisation, the Prime Minister-designate, Haider al-Abadi: Person, Haider al-Abadi: Person, The Members of the Security Council: Organisation, the Constitution: DocumentReference, Security Council: Organisation, all political parties: Organisation, their supporters: Organisation, The Members of the Security Council: Organisation, the Iraq people: Organisation, Iraq: Location, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Security Council: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 58A3656BDCA7B89C38CE5A1985834740
TEXT:
Since the Syrian conflict began, the Australian Government has responded with over $135 million for humanitarian assistance. At the request of DFAT’s Middle East Branch, ODE has completed an evaluation examining the effectiveness of this response. This evaluation considers both the efficacy of material assistance provided and that of Australia’s diplomatic efforts. It also identifies some important ways in which Australia’s response to this, and other, protracted crises might be further strengthened.
ENTITIES:
Syrian: Nationality, the Australian Government: Organisation, Australian: Nationality, $135 million: Money, DFAT’s Middle East Branch: Organisation, Middle East: Location, st Branch: Vehicle, ODE: Organisation, Australia: Location, Australia: Organisation, Australia: Location, Australia: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: D863D678C3A4BD8EDFCE2B7D27881974
TEXT:
The area of Mosul district, Ninewa province in Iraq, has been declared a designated area under section 119.3 of the Criminal Code. This means it will be an offence under Australian law to enter, or remain in, Mosul district without a legitimate purpose.

Declaring Mosul district under the criminal code follows the declaration of Al-Raqqa province in Syria in December 2014. The city of Mosul is the largest city controlled by Daesh in Iraq.
ENTITIES:
The area of Mosul district, Ninewa province: Location, Criminal Code: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Iraq: Location, section 119.3 of the Criminal Code: DocumentReference, Australian: Nationality, Mosul: Location, Mosul district: Location, Mosul: Location, Mosul district: Location, December 2014: Temporal, Al-Raqqa province: Location, Raqqa: Location, Syria: Location, The city of Mosul: Location, The city: Location, Mosul: Location, largest city: Location, Daesh: Organisation, Iraq: Location, 

DOCUMENT: DEC7A9B44536B3E01C85E64BAF2E07A6
TEXT:
Foreign Minister Julie Bishop met with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, HE Dr Ibrahim Al-Ja’afari, in Canberra on 12 February to discuss bilateral relations and reaffirm our shared commitment to combating the terrorist threat of Daesh (also known as ISIL).
ENTITIES:
Foreign Minister Julie Bishop: Person, Canberra: Location, 12 February: Temporal, Julie Bishop: Person, Daesh: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iraq: Person, Foreign Affairs: Organisation, Iraq: Location, HE Dr Ibrahim Al-Ja’afari: Person, Dr Ibrahim Al-Ja’afari: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 3095FB15AFF7B552702E9EF46C083FDD
TEXT:
Syria has accused Israel of bombarding an area west of Damascus, with reports of a military airport being hit.
State television quoted the army as saying several rockets landed in the airport compound in Mezzeh, Reuters news agency reports.
It remains unclear if the alleged bombardment, which caused fires, has caused any casualties.
The Israeli government has previously neither confirmed nor denied that it carries out strikes in Syria.
It is thought to have bombed weapons shipments intended for Lebanon's Hezbollah movement several times since Syria's civil war began in 2011.
Hezbollah, which fought a month-long war with Israel in 2006, has sent thousands of fighters to Syria to support President Bashar al-Assad's forces.
State-run Syrian news agency Sana reported explosions at the Mezzeh military airport and said ambulances were rushing to the scene.
"The army was quoted as warning Israel ""of the repercussions of the flagrant attack"", according to Reuters."
In December, Syrian state media said an Israeli missile strike had targeted the airport in Mezzeh, causing fires but no casualties.
Days earlier, on 30 November, Israeli jets were reported to have fired missiles from Lebanese airspace into Syria, striking Sabboura, an area outside Damascus.
The target was unclear but the highway from Lebanon to Damascus runs through the town.

ENTITIES:
Syria: Location, Syria: Organisation, Israel: Location, Israel: Organisation, west of Damascus: Location, Damascus: Location, a military airport: Location, State television: Organisation, Reuters: Organisation, Reuters news agency: Organisation, the army: Organisation, rockets: Weapon, the airport compound: Location, Mezzeh: Location, the highway from Lebanon to Damascus: Location, Lebanon: Location, Damascus: Location, the town: Location, The Israeli government: Organisation, Israeli: Nationality, Syria: Location, It: Organisation, Syria: Location, 2011: Temporal, Lebanon: Location, Lebanon: Organisation, Hezbollah: Organisation, Hezbollah movement: Organisation, Hezbollah: Organisation, President Bashar al-Assad: Person, President Bashar al-Assad's forces: Organisation, Israel: Location, Israel: Organisation, 2006: Temporal, thousands of fighters: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian news agency Sana: Organisation, Sana: Organisation, the Mezzeh military airport: Location, The army: Organisation, Reuters: Organisation, Israel: Location, Israel: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian state media: Organisation, December: Temporal, Israeli: Nationality, missile: Weapon, the airport: Location, Mezzeh: Location, Days earlier: Location, Syria: Location, Sabboura: Location, an area outside Damascus: Location, Damascus: Location, 30 November: Location, Israeli: Nationality, Israeli jets: MilitaryPlatform, missiles: Weapon, Lebanese airspace: Location, Lebanese: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: 55AE94FC6D11B6BC1A89A144F6BA49FF
TEXT:
When a place has been besieged for years and hunger stalks the streets, you might have thought people would have little interest in books. But enthusiasts have stocked an underground library in Syria with volumes rescued from bombed buildings - and users dodge shells and bullets to reach it.
Down a flight of steep steps, as far as it's possible to go from the flying shrapnel, shelling and snipers' bullets above, is a large dimly lit room. Buried beneath a bomb-damaged building, it's home to a secret library that provides learning, hope and inspiration to many in the besieged Damascus suburb of Darayya.
"""We saw that it was vital to create a new library so that we could continue our education. We put it in the basement to help stop it being destroyed by shells and bombs like so many other buildings here,"" says Anas Ahmad, a former civil engineering student who was one of the founders."
The siege of Darayya by government and pro-Assad forces began nearly four years ago. Since then Anas and other volunteers, many of them also former students whose studies were brought to a halt by the war, have collected more than 14,000 books on just about every subject imaginable. 
Over the same period more than 2,000 people - many of them civilians - have been killed. But that has not stopped Anas and his friends scouring the devastated streets for more material to fill the library's shelves. 
"""In many cases we get books from bomb or shell-damaged homes. The majority of these places are near the front line, so collecting them is very dangerous,"" he says."
"""We have to go through bombed-out buildings to hide ourselves from snipers. We have to be extremely careful because snipers sometimes follow us in their sights, anticipating the next step we'll take."""
You can hear more from the people who use Syria's Secret Library on Radio 4's Crossing Continents at 11am on Thursday 28 July
At first glance the idea of people risking life and limb to collect books for a library seems bizarre. But Anas says it helps the community in all sorts of ways. Volunteers working at the hospital use the library's books to advise them on how to treat patients; untrained teachers use them to help them prepare classes; and aspiring dentists raid the shelves for advice on doing fillings and extracting teeth.
About 8,000 of Darayya's population of 80,000 have fled. But nobody can leave now. 
Since a temporary truce broke down in May, shells and barrel bombs have fallen almost every day. For the same reason, it's long been impossible for journalists to enter Darayya, so I have been conducting interviews by Skype - my conversations repeatedly interrupted by shattering explosions, so loud that they distort the studio's speakers.
The location of the library is secret because Anas and other users fear it would be targeted by Darayya's attackers if they knew where it was. 
As it is, the library is in an area considered too dangerous for children to approach. One young girl, Islam, tells me that she spends almost all her time indoors, playing games to help her ignore the gnawing pangs of hunger in her stomach and reading library books she is given by friends. 
She tells me she has no idea about the cause of the bloodshed around her.
"""All I know is I'm just being fired at,"" she says."
"""I'll be sitting by myself, watching some place being shelled and I'm thinking, 'Why are they bombing this place?' Sometimes I hear that someone has died because of their injuries and I ask myself, 'Why did he die, what did he do?' I don't know."""
"There is one child who visits the library every day, however, because he lives next door. For 14-year-old Amjad it is safer there than being above ground, and over time his enthusiasm for the place has earned him the role of ""deputy librarian""."
In one of our Skype conversations, Anas tells me that as well as aspiring teachers, doctors and dentists looking for technical or academic books, many still just read for the love of it. The majority of their most popular books are by well-known Arab writers such as the poet and playwright Ahmed Shawqi, known as the Prince of Poets, or Syrian author al-Tanawi, who chronicled rebellions in the Arab world. But he says there's also much enthusiasm for names that are more familiar in the West. 
"""I've read some books by French writers but I like Hamlet the best,"" says Abdulbaset Alahmar, another former student in his mid-20s."
"""Shakespeare's style of writing is simply beautiful. He describes every single detail so vividly that it's like I'm in a cinema watching a film in front of me. To be honest I became so obsessed with Hamlet that I began reading it at work. In the end I had to tell myself to stop!"" "
But, I ask him, in a besieged town that has only had access to two aid convoys in nearly four years, wouldn't it make more sense for the library enthusiasts to spend their time looking for food rather than books?
"""I believe the brain is like a muscle. And reading has definitely made mine stronger. My enlightened brain has now fed my soul too,"" he replies."
"""In a sense the library gave me back my life. It's helped me to meet others more mature than me, people who I can discuss issues with and learn things from.  I would say that just like the body needs food, the soul needs books."""
It turns out that even the greatly out-gunned Free Syrian Army fighters, who have the daunting task of defending the town, are avid readers. 
"""Truly I swear the library holds a special place in all our hearts. And every time there's shelling near the library we pray for it,"" says Omar Abu Anas, a former engineering student now helping to defend his home town."
Every time he heads for the front line, he stocks up with books first. Once there he spends much of his time with a rifle in one hand and a book in the other. 
"""In the heart of the front line, I have what I'd call a mini library. So I bring a collection of books and I put them there. So I sit there for six or seven hours, reading.""  "
Many of his comrades also have their own mini front line libraries, he says, adding that at just about every defence point, which are spaced about 50m apart, you will find a collection of borrowed books.
"""So, for example, when I have finished reading a book I go up to one of the others on the front line and exchange it for one he has just read.  It's a great way of exchanging ideas as well as books."""
Unfortunately for Omar, his fellow fighters and the people of Darayya, they may soon have little time for reading. Over the past two weeks Syrian government forces and their Hezbollah allies have moved into all the farmland around the suburb and even some outlying residential areas. 
One man I spoke to predicted that after nearly four long years of siege Darayya could fall within days.
For now though, Omar says the library is helping to strengthen the town's defences as well as its resolve. 
"""Books motivate us to keep on going. We read how in the past everyone turned their backs on a particular nation, yet they still made it. So we can be like that too. They help us plan for life once Assad is gone. We can only do that through the books we are reading. We want to be a free nation. And hopefully, by reading, we can achieve this."" "
UPDATE (3 August 2016): Within days of the publication of this story, Omar was killed on the front line during an attack by pro-Assad forces 

ENTITIES:
users: Organisation, it: Location, an underground library: Location, enthusiasts: Organisation, Syria: Location, books: DocumentReference, bomb: Weapon, shell: Person, shell: Weapon, damaged homes: Location, the front line: Location, he: Person, bombed-out buildings: Location, We: Organisation, ourselves: Organisation, snipers: Organisation, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, snipers: Organisation, 11am: Temporal, 11am on Thursday 28 July: Temporal, a library: Location, the people who use Syria's Secret Library: Organisation, Syria: Location, Secret Library: Organisation, Radio 4: Organisation, Anas: Person, Volunteers: Organisation, untrained teachers: Organisation, aspiring dentists: Organisation, the hospital: Location, the library's books: DocumentReference, patients: Organisation, Darayya: Location, Darayya's population: Organisation, 80,000: Quantity, 8,000: Quantity, May: Person, May: Temporal, shells: Weapon, barrel bombs: Weapon, snipers' bullets: Weapon, the studio: Location, journalists: Organisation, Darayya: Location, I: Person, the library: Location, Anas: Person, other users: Organisation, Darayya: Location, Darayya's attackers: Organisation, the library: Location, children: Organisation, One young girl: Person, Islam: Nationality, Islam: Person, she: Person, friends: Organisation, me: Person, she: Person, her: Person, She: Person, me: Person, she: Person, she: Person, her: Person, I: Person, I: Person, this place: Location, myself: Person, I: Person, I: Person, they: Organisation, I: Person, I: Person, I: Person, one child: Person, the library: Location, every day: Temporal, he: Person, next door: Location, Amjad: Person, 14-year-old: Quantity, his: Person, Damascus: Location, suburb of Darayya: Location, a bomb-damaged building: Location, Darayya: Location, bomb: Weapon, library: Location, hope: Person, Anas: Person, me: Person, aspiring teachers, doctors and dentists: Organisation, Ahmed Shawqi: Person, Syrian: Nationality, al-Tanawi: Person, the Arab world: Location, Arab: Nationality, books: DocumentReference, Arab: Nationality, Arab writers: Organisation, he: Person, French: Nationality, I: Person, I: Person, Abdulbaset Alahmar: Person, Shakespeare: Person, He: Person, me: Person, I: Person, st I: Vehicle, I: Person, I: Person, two: Quantity, I: Person, nearly four years: Temporal, myself: Person, I: Person, him: Person, a besieged town: Location, I: Person, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, he: Person, the library: Location, me: Person, me: Person, me: Person, I: Person, I: Person, the town: Location, Free Syrian Army fighters: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Army: Organisation, the library: Location, Truly: Person, I: Person, his home town: Location, the library: Location, we: Organisation, Omar Abu Anas: Person, he: Person, the front line: Location, he: Person, a rifle: Weapon, rifle: Weapon, there: Location, the front line: Location, I: Person, We: Organisation, here: Location, Anas Ahmad: Person, the basement: Location, a former civil engineering student: Person, the founders: Organisation, shells: Weapon, bombs: Weapon, I: Person, I: Person, there: Location, six or seven hours: Temporal, I: Person, there: Location, every defence point: Location, 50m: Quantity, Many of his comrades: Organisation, he: Person, he: Person, I: Person, I: Person, the others: Organisation, the front line: Location, Omar: Person, his fellow fighters: Organisation, the people of Darayya: Organisation, Darayya: Location, they: Organisation, may: Person, some outlying residential areas: Location, Syrian government: Organisation, Syrian government forces: Organisation, the past two weeks: Temporal, their Hezbollah allies: Organisation, Hezbollah: Organisation, all the farmland around the suburb: Location, One man: Person, nearly four long years: Temporal,  : Person, Darayya: Location, I: Person, Omar: Person, the library: Location, the town: Location, us: Organisation, Darayya: Location, government and pro-Assad forces: Organisation, Assad: Person, four years ago: Temporal, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, They: Organisation, us: Organisation, Assad: Person, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, We: Organisation, Omar: Person, the front line: Location, pro-Assad forces: Organisation, Assad: Person, 3 August 2016: Temporal, Anas: Person, 14,000: Quantity, other volunteers: Organisation, 2,000: Quantity, people: Organisation, the library: Location, Anas: Person, his friends: Organisation, the devastated streets: Location, streets: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 62A11A900C2139D329C5F0E29B0B2AC4
TEXT:
Human Rights Watch has called for an investigation into an attack on a mosque in northern Iraq on Friday that killed at least 13 women and children.
Witnesses believe the attack in Daquq was an air strike because of the sound of aircraft and scale of destruction.
"The US-led coalition conducting air strikes against so-called Islamic State in Iraq has said it has ""definitively determined"" it was not responsible."
The Iraqi military has said it is looking into the incident.
However, a spokesman declined to say whether Iraqi air force planes were flying in the area, according to the Associated Press.
HRW said the woman's section of the al-Khani mosque in Daquq, a Kurdish-controlled town about 30km (19 miles) south of Kirkuk, had been filled with Shia Muslim worshippers when it was hit by an explosion.
A man whose sister was killed told the campaign group that he had heard a plane flying over his home, 300m (984ft) from the mosque, shortly before the blast. 
Another resident said he had had heard a missile whizzing through the air. 
HRW studied video footage and photos of the aftermath, which it said did not show any military structures or forces in the vicinity.
It also noted that there was a base for Kurdish Peshmerga fighters outside Daquq and that the town was within shelling range of the nearest IS-controlled territory, about 15km away.
A police officer told HRW that earlier on Friday IS had carried out a mortar attack on a Peshmerga frontline position about 6km from Daquq.
A non-governmental security analyst meanwhile reported that IS fighters had been present in the town at the time of the attack. However, residents said they had not seen any near the mosque. 
"""Even in the heat of battle, armed forces should take all feasible precautions to avoid harming civilians,"" said Lama Fakih, HRW's deputy Middle East director. ""Iraqi forces should investigate whether this was a possible unlawful airstrike that killed civilians and report their findings. If this turns out to be their fault, they should take appropriate measures to compensate the victims."""

ENTITIES:
Human Rights Watch: Organisation, at least 13 women and children: Organisation, a mosque: Location, northern Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Friday: Temporal, Witnesses: Organisation, Daquq: Location, air strike: Weapon, aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, A police officer: Person, 6km: Quantity, Daquq: Location, HRW: Organisation, Friday: Temporal, IS: Organisation, mortar: Weapon, a Peshmerga frontline position: Location, A non-governmental security analyst: Person, time of the attack: Temporal, IS: Organisation, IS fighters: Organisation, the town: Location, the mosque: Location, residents: Organisation, Lama Fakih: Person, HRW: Organisation, HRW's deputy Middle East director: Person, Middle East: Location, armed forces: Organisation, civilians: Organisation, Iraqi forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, they: Organisation, the victims: Organisation, The US-led coalition: Organisation, US-led: Location, Islamic: Nationality, Islamic State in Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, The Iraqi military: Organisation, it: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the Associated Press: Organisation, Associated Press: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi air force planes: MilitaryPlatform, the area: Location, a spokesman: Person, HRW: Organisation, 19 miles: Quantity, Kirkuk: Location, Shia: Nationality, Shia Muslim worshippers: Organisation, Muslim: Person, the al-Khani mosque: Location, Daquq: Location, a Kurdish-controlled town about 30km (19 miles) south of Kirkuk: Location, Kurdish: Nationality, the woman's section of the al-Khani mosque: Location, 30km: Quantity, A man: Person, 300m: Quantity, 984ft: Quantity, sister: Person, the mosque: Location, the camp: Location, the campaign group: Organisation, he: Person, plane: MilitaryPlatform, his home: Location, Another resident: Person, he: Person, missile: Weapon, HRW: Organisation, it: Organisation, st IS: Vehicle, IS-controlled territory: Location, 15km: Quantity, a base: Location, Kurdish: Nationality, Kurdish Peshmerga fighters: Organisation, Daquq: Location, the town: Location, 

DOCUMENT: A0302EA7B1BDE005835BC09ECBF2930A
TEXT:
This is a story of Karim and Sadiq. It's also a story about Iraq. 
The two men first met in 2001 - a time when Iraq was in the iron grip of Saddam Hussein, a time of few freedoms.
Karim Wasifi, studying music in the United States, slipped into Baghdad to help musicians and other artists. Once there, he needed to buy an Iraqi-made suit. He knew where to find it - in Baghdad's popular Karrada neighbourhood, a place where all of Iraq lived, people of every faith, and no faith. Sadiq Maroof was a young shopkeeper there.  
This week, they met again, unexpectedly, on the same street, both in their 40s now. Karim, with his tangle of black curly hair, and round black-rimmed glasses, was wearing black in mourning. Sadiq, in a simple T-shirt, with a receding hairline now, wore his own sadness like a cloak.  Weeks earlier, the so-called Islamic State had made it to this street - and carried out its deadliest attack, ever. 292 Iraqis died here. 
I watched the two men say hello, and their moment of recognition.
"""We've met before,"" Sadiq told Karim proudly. ""Yes, I remember,"" Karim replied.  Then, turning to me, he explained how Sadiq's family's store was so well known, well regarded, in Baghdad. Sadiq beamed. "
"Karim is now known by many. He's the conductor of Iraq's famed National Symphony Orchestra, a composer, and, he says, an arts activist. They call him ""the maestro""."
He came to Karrada to play his cello, a 300-year-old instrument he cradled carefully as crowds gathered. A scorching Baghdad heat clung on, although the sun had set a few hours before.
Young men ran to bring Karim two plastic chairs they stacked together… a solid seat for a big man with an even bigger message. Karim said he wanted to create a moment of beauty, of civilisation, at the very site where a group caused terror and death, and created darkness. 
The mournful lament from his cello wafted through the dark warren of charred and gutted shops which now line a street once known for its bright, blinking neon signs and shops selling everything from perfume to pretty dresses to kebabs.
Sadiq had also come to Karrada to remember the dead. He survived the night of the attack by jumping from a window. But nine members of his family died in the blazing orange fireball set off by the blast. The victims included his nephews working in the family's clothing business, together with their wives and children. They'd come to shop on a festive night just before the Muslim Eid celebration.
"And many of his friends also burned alive in a shopping centre with no emergency exits, no fire escapes. ""They were as precious as my family,"" he explained, anger and emotion still raw, three weeks on from the attack. "
"The stock of clothing his family has proudly sold for years is just mounds of blackness now.  ""It's OK,"" he told me with a shrug and a forced smile. ""We'll build the business again."" "
Sadiq stood behind Karim when the musician played a piece he'd composed himself. Immortal Spirits, Karim called it. He often goes to the scenes of bombings to play because he knows that, with every day this war goes on, a bit more of the fabric of life in this city dies. Many in Iraq's National Symphony Orchestra have already left. Karim's own family has packed up too.
Yet like many Iraqis who returned after the 2003 war toppled Saddam Hussein, Karim insists he will stay. He's training young musicians - the best will fill the orchestra's empty chairs. He's also set up an art space for young poets, painters, and, of course, musicians. 
But the young man he met on this street years ago now says he wants to go. Sadiq draws me aside, as Karim continues to play, and tells me he can't take life here any more. 
They're the two sides of Iraq you see everywhere you go. Some Iraqis still insist their life is here and only here. But many others, especially the young, see no future here at all. And then there's the vast majority who feel they have no choice but to carry on, no matter what. 
Karim symbolises a country once famed in the region and beyond for its world-class artists, architects, archaeologists and more. Sadiq represents the enterprising spirit in an oil-rich land which should be able to bring prosperity for its people.
Karim and Sadiq met again this week for another fleeting moment. Who can say when their paths will cross once more or what Iraq will be like then? 
Follow @BBCNewsMagazine on Twitter and on Facebook

ENTITIES:
Karim: Person, Sadiq: Person, Iraq: Location, Islamic: Nationality, Islamic State: Organisation, this street: Location, 292 Iraqis: Organisation, here: Location, I: Person, the two men: Organisation, Sadiq: Person, We: Organisation, Karim: Person, Karim: Person, I: Person, me: Person, he: Person, Sadiq: Person, Sadiq's family: Organisation, Sadiq's family's store: Location, s family: Organisation, Baghdad: Location, Sadiq: Person, Karim: Person, He: Person, Iraq: Location, Iraq's famed National Symphony Orchestra: Organisation, he: Person, him: Person, The two men: Organisation, 2001: Temporal, Iraq: Location, Saddam Hussein: Person, He: Person, Karrada: Location, 300-year-old: Quantity, he: Person, crowds: Organisation, Baghdad: Location, a few hours before: Temporal, Young men: Organisation, Karim: Person, they: Organisation, Karim: Person, he: Person, the very site: Location, a group: Organisation, a street: Location, Sadiq: Person, Karrada: Location, He: Person, the night of the attack: Temporal, his family: Organisation, nine members: Organisation, The victims: Organisation, his nephews: Organisation, the family: Organisation, the family's clothing business: Organisation, their wives and children: Organisation, They: Organisation, a festive night just before the Muslim Eid celebration: Temporal, Muslim: Nationality, Karim Wasifi: Person, Karim: Person, the United States: Location, United States: Location, Baghdad: Location, musicians and other artists: Organisation, a shopping centre: Location, many of his friends: Organisation, he: Person, three weeks: Temporal, his family: Organisation, years: Temporal, he: Person, me: Person, OK: Location, the business: Organisation, We: Organisation, Sadiq: Person, Karim: Person, the musician: Person, he: Person, Karim: Person, He: Person, this city: Location, the scenes of bombings: Location, he: Person, Iraq: Location, Iraq's National Symphony Orchestra: Organisation, Karim's own family: Organisation, Karim: Person, own family: Organisation, he: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, there: Location, Iraqis: Organisation, 2003: Temporal, Saddam Hussein: Person, Karim: Person, he: Person, He: Person, young musicians: Organisation, He: Person, an art space: Location, young poets: Organisation, painters: Organisation, musicians: Organisation, he: Person, this street: Location, the young man: Person, he: Person, Sadiq: Person, me: Person, Karim: Person, me: Person, here: Location, Iraq: Location, Some Iraqis: Organisation, here: Location, here: Location, here: Location, carry: Person, Karim: Location, Karim: Person, the region: Location, He: Person, faith: Person, faith: Person, Baghdad: Location, Karrada: Person, Karrada neighbourhood: Location, Iraq: Location, Sadiq: Person, an oil-rich land: Location, Karim: Person, Sadiq: Person, Iraq: Location, @BBCNewsMagazine: CommsIdentifier, BBCNewsMagazine: CommsIdentifier, Sadiq Maroof: Person, Sadiq: Person, there: Location, Karim: Person, Sadiq: Person, 

DOCUMENT: A575C2B05115236A223DBE644F73BE9A
TEXT:
In a sun-baked field just outside the Jordanian city of Ramtha, a young group of Syrian men and women weave their way up and down rows of green peppers.
"""I do planting, weeding and harvesting on the farm,"" says Manal, as she empties her bag of vegetables into a sack held by her younger brother. ""It's the same work we used to do on our land back in Homs."" "
Refugees have long been working illegally on farms in Jordan but risked being deported back to Syria if they were caught.
Now they can get free work permits.
"""We feel the difference,"" says Mohammed. ""Before we couldn't work outside easily. We hid from the police. With the permits, it's excellent."""
More than 650,000 Syrians are registered as refugees in Jordan. However, until recently, the government allowed only a few thousand to work. 
It was worried they would push down wages, take jobs from Jordanians and be encouraged to stay permanently, stirring up resentment.  
Now the authorities are experimenting with another possibility - that the presence of so many Syrians could boost the sluggish economy.  
About 350 Syrians work for al-Rahman Farms.  
"""It helped us a lot. They saved us from having to bring in migrant labourers from abroad. They also saved us money,"" says the farms' owner, Jamal Alzoubi."
"""We used to hire Egyptians at two Jordanian dinars (£2.10; $2.80) an hour. They dictated terms. When the Syrians came it reduced wages. We had more workers and we started to cultivate more land. Now we have a big area."""
Syrians at the farm come from a nearby refugee camp. They are given breakfast and work for an hourly rate of one dinar. Mr Alzoubi is convinced it is a win-win situation.
"""Now these people live in dignity,"" he says. ""The camp where they live is oppressive but now they're free to come and go. They go to the market. They have permits.  There's no problem."""
The reversal of Jordanian policy was announced at a conference on Syria for international donors in London in February.
European leaders pledged to ease trade regulations in return. 
Last month, a key deal was reached to simplify the so-called rules of origin for Jordanian factories exporting to the European Union.
It allows more imported raw materials to be used in finished products that are labelled as Jordan-made, so they get duty-free access to EU markets.
There are quotas for the numbers of Syrians that businesses must employ. 
"""Having the new rules of origin and having the ability to employ Syrians in sectors - especially blue collar sectors - is very much allowing us to convert this burden and challenge into an opportunity,"" says Jordanian planning minister, Imad Fakhoury."
"""Hopefully this will increase jobs for Jordanians as well as for Syrian refugees and attract new investments, increasing exports which will contribute to economic growth."""
Jordan's economy is currently growing at just 2.4% a year. It has suffered from a loss of trade with its war-torn neighbours, Syria and Iraq and there is high national debt.
Now it is being offered international support to turn things around.
The World Bank has already announced a $100m interest-free loan. Next month it is expected to announce a $300m programme to attract investment, reform the labour market and create jobs.
The target is for Jordan to employ 200,000 Syrians.
The EU, in particular, wants more refugees to work; it hopes that by improving their living standards, they will be less likely to head for European shores.  
Donors also want to reduce dependence on handouts.
Funds pledged for some 4.7 million Syrians now living in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey has consistently fallen short of targets. Last year's influx of hundreds of thousands to Europe partly resulted from cuts to food aid and cash payments.
So far some 20,000 work permits have been given out in Jordan. Syrian refugees are happy to have them but many say it will take more to improve their lot. 
In Amman, I meet a middle-aged carpenter who asks us not to give his name. He is making high-end, custom-made furniture as he once did for his family's shops in Homs.  
However, in Jordan, he can be paid only the minimum wage. His permit describes him as doing a different, low-skilled job. 
"""There's huge suffering even among those who work,"" the carpenter says. ""The salaries aren't enough and the United Nations isn't providing much.  I'm behind on my rent, I have debts."""
"""We don't get healthcare and I spent all my savings on hospital treatment for my wife,"" he goes on. ""I need a heart procedure and I shouldn't work but the day I don't work, I don't eat."""

ENTITIES:
a sun-baked field: Location, the Jordanian city of Ramtha: Location, Jordanian city: Location, a young group of Syrian men and women: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, her younger brother: Person, I: Person, the farm: Location, Manal: Person, she: Person, It: Organisation, they: Organisation, Jordanians: Organisation, the authorities: Organisation, Syrians: Organisation, al-Rahman Farms: Organisation, 350 Syrians: Organisation, us: Organisation, They: Organisation, us: Organisation, the farms: Location, Jamal: Person, Jamal Alzoubi: Person, Egyptians: Organisation, We: Organisation, two Jordanian dinars: Money, Jordanian: Nationality, £2.10: Money, $2.80: Money, They: Organisation, wages: Money, the Syrians: Organisation, Syrians: Organisation, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, farms: Location, Jordan: Location, Syria: Location, they: Organisation, we: Organisation, our land: Location, Homs: Location, Refugees: Organisation, a big area: Location, we: Organisation, Syrians at the farm: Organisation, refugee camp: Location, They: Organisation, one dinar: Money, Mr Alzoubi: Person, he: Person, these people: Organisation, they: Organisation, The camp: Location, they: Organisation, They: Organisation, the market: Location, They: Organisation, London: Location, February: Temporal, Jordanian: Nationality, Syria: Location, international donors: Organisation, work permits: DocumentReference, they: Organisation, European leaders: Organisation, European: Nationality, Last month: Temporal, the European Union: Organisation, European Union: Organisation, Jordanian factories: Organisation, Jordanian: Nationality, EU: Organisation, EU markets: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Nationality, Syrians: Organisation, businesses: Organisation, us: Organisation, Jordanian: Nationality, Jordanian planning minister, Imad Fakhoury: Person, Imad Fakhoury: Person, Syrians: Organisation, Jordanians: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian refugees: Organisation, Jordan: Organisation, Jordan: Person, 2.4% a year: Quantity, It: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syria: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, it: Organisation, The World Bank: Organisation, $100m: Money, World Bank: Organisation, Mohammed: Person, Next month: Temporal, $300m: Money, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Organisation, 200,000: Quantity, Syrians: Organisation, The EU: Organisation, they: Organisation, European: Nationality, European shores: Location, refugees: Organisation, Donors: Organisation, handouts: Money, 4.7 million: Quantity, Syrians: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Lebanon: Location, Turkey: Location, Last year: Temporal, hundreds of thousands: Quantity, Europe: Location, 20,000: Quantity, work permits: DocumentReference, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Person, Syrian refugees: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, happy: Person, I: Person, a middle-aged carpenter: Person, Amman: Location, us: Organisation, He: Person, his family's shops: Organisation, Homs: Location, we: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Person, he: Person, him: Person, the carpenter: Person, The salaries: Money, The: Person, the United Nations: Organisation, United Nations: Organisation, I: Person, my: Person, I: Person, I: Person, my: Person, my wife: Person, he: Person, I: Person, I: Person, I: Person, I: Person, We: Organisation, the police: Organisation, the permits: DocumentReference, 650,000: Quantity, Syrians: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Person, the government: Organisation, a few thousand: Quantity, 

DOCUMENT: AEBFCD2500E5B57C7C416020C270EA5A
TEXT:
UN human rights staff have received reports of atrocities being committed by Islamic State militants as Iraqi government forces close in on Mosul.
In one case, three women and three children were allegedly shot dead after trailing behind while being forced to march from one village to another.
Elsewhere, 15 civilians were reportedly killed and their bodies thrown into a river in an attempt to spread terror.
The UN says this reinforces fears that IS will use civilians as human shields.
About 30,000 Iraqi security force personnel, Kurdish fighters, Sunni Arab tribesmen and Shia militiamen, assisted by US-led coalition air strikes, launched the long-awaited offensive to retake Mosul eight days ago.
The operation is expected to take weeks, if not months, depending on how much resistance they face from the 3,000 to 5,000 militants believed to be inside Mosul. 
Speaking after a meeting with coalition counterparts in Paris, the US Defense Secretary Ash Carter said the offensive was proceeding as planned. 
He said the groundwork was being laid for the isolation of Islamic State in the Syrian city of Raqqa, the capital of the group's self-proclaimed caliphate. 
"""As we meet here, we are hoping to generate the local forces that will do so,"" he said, adding that the two campaigns might overlap."
A spokesman for the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Rupert Colville, told a news conference in Geneva on Tuesday that it was continuing to receive reports of depredations against children and women, as well as male civilians.
"""It is however hard to immediately verify all the reports we are getting, so the following examples should be treated as preliminary and not definitive,"" he noted."
According to Mr Colville, human rights staff were informed that IS fighters had killed 15 civilians in the village of Safina, about 45km (28 miles) south of Mosul, and threw their bodies in the river. 
Last Wednesday, militants reportedly tied six men from the same village to a vehicle by their hands and dragged them around, apparently because they were related to a tribal leader fighting IS alongside Iraqi government forces. They were also allegedly beaten with sticks and gun butts. 
The following day, Iraqi security forces reportedly discovered the bodies of 70 civilians inside houses in the village of Tuloul Naser, about 35km south of Mosul. 
On Saturday, militants shot dead three women and three children from Rufaila, also south of Mosul, because they were trailing behind a group of other people from the same village who were being forced by IS to relocate to another area. 
The victims were lagging behind because one child had a disability. She was apparently among those killed. 
And on Sunday, members of IS are reported to have killed 50 former Iraqi police officers they had been holding in a building outside Mosul.
"""We very much fear that these will not be the last such reports we receive of such barbaric acts by [IS], and repeat our call on government forces and their allies to ensure their fighters do not take revenge on any of the civilians who escape from areas under IS control, and treat all suspected IS fighters they capture in accordance with international humanitarian law,"" said Mr Colville."
Iraqi security forces and allied Shia Muslim paramilitary groups have been accused of committing serious violations during previous operations against IS.
Last week, Amnesty International alleged they had subjected Sunni Arabs who had fled IS to arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance and unlawful killing after capturing them or placing them in custody.
Also on Tuesday, a Russian military spokesman accused the US-led coalition of killing more than 60 civilians and injuring 200 others in air strikes in and around Mosul over the past three days. 
One jet bombed a school for girls in a southern district of the city on Friday, Lt Gen Sergei Rudskoi said.

ENTITIES:
UN: Organisation, UN human rights staff: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi government forces: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Islamic State militants: Organisation, Islamic State: Organisation, three women and three children: Organisation, he: Person, we: Organisation, the village of Safina: Location, Safina: Location, Mr Colville: Person, 45km: Quantity, 28 miles: Quantity, Mosul: Location, human rights staff: Organisation, IS: Organisation, IS fighters: Organisation, 15 civilians: Organisation, Last Wednesday: Temporal, them: Organisation, militants: Organisation, a tribal leader: Person, IS: Organisation, st Wednesday: Vehicle, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi government forces: Organisation, six men: Organisation, the same village: Location, a vehicle: Vehicle, They: Organisation, gun butts: Weapon, The following day: Temporal, the village of Tuloul Naser: Location, 35km: Quantity, 35km south of Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, 70 civilians: Organisation, houses: Location, militants: Organisation, group of other people: Organisation, the same village: Location, IS: Organisation, another area: Location, Saturday: Temporal, three women and three children: Organisation, Rufaila: Location, Mosul: Location, The victims: Organisation, one child: Person, She: Person, a building: Location, Mosul: Location, IS: Organisation, 50: Quantity, former Iraqi police officers: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Sunday: Temporal, they: Organisation, IS: Organisation, government forces: Organisation, their allies: Organisation, their fighters: Organisation, the civilians who escape: Organisation, areas under IS control: Location, IS: Organisation, suspected IS fighters: Organisation, IS: Organisation, We: Organisation, Mr Colville: Person, we: Organisation, 15 civilians: Organisation, a river: Location, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, st IS: Vehicle, IS: Organisation, Shia: Nationality, Shia Muslim paramilitary groups: Organisation, Muslim: Person, Last week: Temporal, Amnesty International: Organisation, them: Organisation, Sunni: Nationality, Sunni Arabs: Organisation, IS: Organisation, 200 others: Organisation, Mosul: Location, a Russian military spokesman: Person, the past three days: Temporal, Russian: Nationality, the US-led coalition: Organisation, US-led: Location, Tuesday: Person, Tuesday: Temporal, 60 civilians: Organisation, One: Quantity, a school for girls: Location, a southern district of the city: Location, jet: MilitaryPlatform, the city: Location, Friday: Temporal, Lt Gen Sergei Rudskoi: Person, Rudskoi: Person, The UN: Organisation, IS: Organisation, UN: Organisation, civilians: Organisation, About 30,000 Iraqi security force personnel: Organisation, US-led: Location, US-led coalition: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Mosul: Location, eight days ago: Temporal, Kurdish: Nationality, Kurdish fighters: Organisation, Sunni: Nationality, Sunni Arab tribesmen: Organisation, Arab: Nationality, Shia militiamen: Organisation, Shia: Nationality, the 3,000 to 5,000 militants: Organisation, 3,000 to 5,000: Quantity, militants: Organisation, Mosul: Location, weeks: Temporal, months: Temporal, they: Organisation, coalition counterparts: Organisation, Paris: Location, the US Defense Secretary Ash Carter: Person, US Defense: Organisation, Ash Carter: Person, He: Person, the group: Organisation, Islamic State: Organisation, the Syrian city of Raqqa: Location, Syrian city: Location, Raqqa: Location, two camp: Location, we: Organisation, the local forces: Organisation, we: Organisation, he: Person, A spokesman: Person, Geneva: Location, Geneva: Person, Tuesday: Person, Tuesday: Temporal, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights: Person, children: Organisation, children and women: Organisation, women: Organisation, UN High Commissioner: Organisation, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights: Organisation, male civilians: Organisation, Human Rights: Organisation, Rupert Colville: Person, a news conference: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: DC40EB7B4BDB1254DAF8A430A8E5383B
TEXT:
At least 43 people have been killed in a car bomb blast in the rebel-held Syrian town of Azaz, near the Turkish border.
The explosion occurred outside a courthouse in the town, just 7km (four miles) from the Turkish frontier.
ENTITIES:
the Turkish border: Location, Turkish: Nationality, people: Organisation, car bomb: Weapon, the rebel-held Syrian town of Azaz: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Azaz: Location, 43: Quantity, a courthouse: Location, the town: Location, 7km: Quantity, four miles: Quantity, the Turkish frontier: Location, Turkish: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: DDC23537DF2DA27754B9327683DCA114
TEXT:
Iraqi forces have seized full control of Mosul University in their battle with so-called Islamic State, Iraqi state television said.
Military forces have been attempting to retake the city - the last major IS stronghold in Iraq - since October.
Iraqi officials said the IS group had used laboratories in the university complex to make chemical weapons.
The head of the country's counter-terrorism operations said retaking the area was a significant victory.
"""This great scientific and cultural building was liberated by the heroes,"" Lt Gen Talib Shaghati, said. ""The liberation of the University of Mosul means much, given its cultural, social and human symbolism."""
Elite troops had entered the compound on Friday as part of a major push into new territory. 
Iraqi military officials claim they now control a large majority of the city's eastern half.
They also control three of the five key bridges crossing the river Tigris, which divides Mosul in two.
The bridges were targeted by coalition air strikes in October with the aim of limiting the ability of IS to resupply or reinforce their positions in the east.
The campaign began in October, but got off to a slow start in the face of tough IS defence and counter-attacks.
But significant gains along the river may open up western Mosul, which is still under IS control, to Iraqi forces seeking to advance.

ENTITIES:
Iraqi forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi state television: Organisation, Mosul University: Location, Mosul University: Organisation, so-called Islamic State: Organisation, Islamic: Nationality, Military forces: Organisation, October: Temporal, the city: Location, IS: Organisation, Iraq: Location, The camp: Location, October: Temporal, IS: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi forces: Organisation, the river: Location, may: Person, western Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, IS: Organisation, Iraqi officials: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the IS group: Organisation, IS: Organisation, the university: Organisation, the university complex: Location, chemical weapons: Weapon, The head of the country's counter-terrorism operations: Person, the area: Location, This great scientific and cultural building: Location, the heroes: Organisation, Lt Gen Talib: Person, Lt Gen Talib Shaghati: Person, Shaghati: Person, the University: Organisation, the University of Mosul: Location, University of Mosul: Organisation, Elite troops: Organisation, the compound: Location, Friday: Temporal, Iraqi military officials: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the city: Location, the city's eastern half: Location, They: Organisation, three of the five: Quantity, key bridges crossing the river Tigris: Location, Tigris: Location, Mosul: Location, The bridges: Location, IS: Organisation, their positions in the east: Location, positions: Location, the east: Location, coalition: Organisation, air strikes: Weapon, October: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: 001C9C3F3DFE16B4921B1E906F66E161
TEXT:
Photographs of U.S. service members in Syria shown wearing patches associated with the Kurdish YPG have recently circulated through traditional and social media. To clarify: U.S. forces are advising and assisting Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF), primarily Syrian Arab forces operating in the northern part of the country who are leading efforts in the campaign to defeat Daesh.

Gen. Joseph Votel, commander of U.S. Central Command said, "We've been very clear from the outset of this campaign that to defeat Daesh we would need to work with many different elements operating on the ground in Iraq and Syria. In Syria, with the support of the 60-plus nation Counter-Daesh Coalition, the SDF, which includes the Syrian Arab Coalition, has made extraordinary progress over the past 20-plus months, retaking more than 18,000 square kilometers of territory previously held by the enemy. We will continue to support their efforts specific to the fight against Daesh. At the same time, we are enormously grateful for the tremendous support provided by our Coalition partners, especially the Turks. They remain integral to the accomplishment of our common objective which is the ultimate defeat of Daesh in Iraq and Syria."
ENTITIES:
U.S. service members: Organisation, Syria: Location, the Kurdish YPG: Organisation, Kurdish: Nationality, U.S. forces: Organisation, the northern part of the country: Location, the camp: Location, Daesh: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian Democratic Forces: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, Syrian Arab: Location, Syrian Arab forces: Organisation, Joseph Votel: Person, Daesh: Organisation, we: Organisation, commander of U.S. Central Command: Person, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, Central Command: Organisation, We: Organisation, this camp: Location, Syrian Arab Coalition: Location, the past 20-plus months: Temporal, more than 18,000 square kilometers of territory: Location, 18,000 square kilometers: Quantity, the enemy: Organisation, Syria: Location, 60-plus: Quantity, Counter-Daesh Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, the SDF: Organisation, the Syrian Arab Coalition: Organisation, We: Organisation, their: Organisation, st Daesh: Vehicle, Daesh: Organisation, the Turks: Organisation, we: Organisation, our Coalition partners: Organisation, They: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, our: Organisation, Daesh: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 1B05F2376ED66CA9FFEB00BE752C16DC
TEXT:
A cool, hazy morning greeted the Jordan Armed Forces – Arab Army as they welcomed Soldiers visiting from 3rd Battalion, 321st Field Artillery Regiment for a live-fire exercise October 25-26, 2016, an event designed to build stronger bonds for the future. 

Despite differences in language and leadership styles, the two units were able to overcome these challenges through the use of translators and linguists while weeks of using their equipment together provided the right environment for the teams to overcome any technical differences.

“We got to shoot with them for the past two weeks before this exercise,” said Spc. Lorraine Walsh, an artillery crewmember and native of Vermillion, South Dakota. “Working with them was enjoyable; the Jordanians are extremely knowledgeable with their systems.” 

Noncommissioned officers from each unit were able to share knowledge from past experiences in an information exchange between subject matter experts.
Staff Sgt. Albert Connelly, an artillery crew chief in Abel Battery, 3rd Battalion, said “we were able to give classes on the different systems we use in the machines.” The exercise showcased the continuing cooperation within the two nations.

“Establishing, maintaining and enhancing interoperability with our coalition partners strengthens the global security framework, protects our common interests, deters conflict, and sets the conditions for future contingency operations,” said Russell. “We always look to build greater relationships with our partners.”
ENTITIES:
3rd Battalion: Location, 3rd Battalion: Organisation, 3rd Battalion, 321st Field Artillery Regiment: Organisation, 321st Field: Location, 321st Field Artillery Regiment: Organisation, Field Artillery Regiment: Organisation, October 25: Temporal, October 25-26, 2016: Temporal, 2016: Temporal, the Jordan Armed Forces: Organisation, the Jordan Armed Forces – Arab Army: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Arab: Nationality, Arab Army: Organisation, Army: Organisation, Soldiers: Organisation, translators and linguists: Organisation, the teams: Organisation, two: Quantity, units: Organisation, We: Organisation, artillery: Weapon, Vermillion: Location, Vermillion, South Dakota: Location, South Dakota: Location, them: Organisation, two weeks: Temporal, Spc. Lorraine Walsh: Person, Lorraine Walsh: Person, them: Organisation, the Jordanians: Organisation, Noncommissioned officers: Organisation, subject matter experts: Organisation, unit: Organisation, Albert Connelly: Person, we: Organisation, an artillery crew chief in Abel Battery, 3rd Battalion: Person, Abel Battery, 3rd Battalion: Organisation, we: Organisation, the two nations: Organisation, Russell: Person, our coalition partners: Organisation, We: Organisation, our partners: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 26CC32861EF7D38FBAE9CABAFC7487E1
TEXT:
On Jan. 8, Coalition military forces conducted 34 strikes against ISIL terrorists in Syria and Iraq. In Syria, Coalition military forces conducted 23 strikes using attack, bomber, fighter and remotely piloted aircraft against ISIL targets. Additionally in Iraq, Coalition military forces conducted 11 strikes coordinated with and in support of the government of Iraq using attack, fighter, and remotely piloted aircraft as well as rocket artillery against ISIL targets.
Syria
.       Near Al Shadaddi, one strike engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed a fighting position.
.       Near Ar Raqqah, 15 strikes engaged five ISIL tactical units; destroyed six oil refinement stills, three supply caches, two bridges, two artillery systems, a VBIED, a bulldozer, a UAV, an IED, a dump truck, a pontoon bridge, a tank, and an armored vehicle; and damaged a supply route.
.       Near Ayn Isa, one strike destroyed a repeater station.
.       Near Dayr Az Zawr, five strikes destroyed eight oil pump jacks, six oil refinement stills, three excavators, and two cranes.
.       Near Palmyra, one strike destroyed an ISIL-held tank.
Iraq
.       Near Al Huwayjah, one strike destroyed a VBIED storage facility.
.       Near Bayji, one strike engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed an ISIL-held building, a VBIED, and a front-end loader.
.       Near Mosul, five strikes engaged four ISIL tactical units; destroyed three ISIL-held buildings, two vehicles, two mortar systems, a rocket propelled grenade launcher, a VBIED staging facility, and a VBIED; damaged 29 supply routes; and suppressed an ISIL tactical unit and a mortar team.
.       Near Rawah, two strikes engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed two ISIL-held building and a VBIED.
.       Near Sinjar, two strikes destroyed three tunnel entrances and two ISIL fighting positions.
Strike assessments are based on initial reports. All aircraft returned to base safely.
A strike, as defined in the CJTF releases, means one or more kinetic events that occur in roughly the same geographic location to produce a single, sometimes cumulative effect for that location.
So having a single aircraft deliver a single weapon against a lone ISIL vehicle is one strike, but so is multiple aircraft delivering dozens of weapons against a group of buildings and vehicles and weapon systems in a compound, for example, having the cumulative effect of making that facility (or facilities) harder or impossible to use.
Accordingly, CJTF-OIR does not report the number or type of aircraft employed in a strike, the number of munitions dropped in each strike, or the number of individual munition impact points against a target. The information used to compile the daily strike releases is based on 'Z' or Greenwich Mean Time.
Ground-based artillery fired in counter-fire or in fire support to maneuver roles are not classified as a strike as defined by CJTF-OIR.
The strikes were conducted as part of Operation Inherent Resolve, the operation to eliminate the ISIL terrorist group and the threat they pose to Iraq, Syria, and the wider international community.
The destruction of ISIL targets in Syria and Iraq further limits the group's ability to project terror and conduct operations. Coalition nations which have conducted strikes in Iraq include Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Coalition nations which have conducted strikes in Syria include Australia, Bahrain, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

ENTITIES:
Coalition military forces: Organisation, Jan: Person, Jan. 8: Temporal, 34: Quantity, strikes: Weapon, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL terrorists: Organisation, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, Coalition military forces: Organisation, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, 23: Quantity, attack, bomber, fighter and remotely piloted aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, two: Quantity, five: Quantity, eight: Quantity, Dayr Az Zawr: Location, six: Quantity, three: Quantity, excavators: Vehicle, one: Quantity, strike: Weapon, ISIL: Organisation, tank: MilitaryPlatform, Palmyra: Location, a VBIED storage facility: Location, VBIED: Organisation, Al Huwayjah: Location, Al Huwayjah: Person, a front-end loader: Weapon, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Bayji: Location, an ISIL-held building: Location, ISIL: Organisation, VBIED: Weapon, vehicles: Vehicle, two: Quantity, mortar: Weapon, five: Quantity, a: Quantity, rocket propelled grenade launcher: Weapon, a: Quantity, VBIED: Organisation, VBIED: Weapon, VBIED staging facility: Location, strikes: Weapon, a: Quantity, VBIED: Weapon, 29: Quantity, supply routes: Location, an: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, a: Quantity, mortar: Weapon, mortar team: Organisation, four: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, Mosul: Location, three: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL-held buildings: Location, two: Quantity, the government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, attack: MilitaryPlatform, fighter: MilitaryPlatform, remotely piloted aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, Iraq: Location, rocket artillery: MilitaryPlatform, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Coalition military forces: Organisation, targets: Location, 11: Quantity, strikes: Weapon, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Rawah: Location, two: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL-held building: Location, a VBIED: Weapon, two: Quantity, strikes: Weapon, three tunnel entrances: Location, Sinjar: Location, two: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, fighting positions: Location, the CJTF: Organisation, a single aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, multiple: Quantity, aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, dozens: Quantity, weapons: Weapon, a group of buildings: Location, vehicles: Vehicle, weapon systems: Weapon, a compound: Location, that facility: Location, facilities: Location, a single weapon: Weapon, a lone ISIL vehicle: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, the wider international community: Organisation, Operation Inherent Resolve: Organisation, strikes: Weapon, the ISIL terrorist group: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, the group: Organisation, one: Quantity, strike: Weapon, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, Al Shadaddi: Location, Al Shadaddi: Person, a fighting position: Location, two bridges: Location, two: Quantity, artillery systems: Weapon, VBIED: Weapon, 15: Quantity, bulldozer: MilitaryPlatform, UAV: MilitaryPlatform, IED: Weapon, strikes: Weapon, dump truck: MilitaryPlatform, pontoon bridge: MilitaryPlatform, tank: MilitaryPlatform, armored vehicle: MilitaryPlatform, a supply route: Location, five ISIL tactical units: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Ar Raqqah: Location, six oil refinement stills: Location, three supply caches: Location, a repeater station: Location, Ayn Isa: Location, Ayn: Person, Isa: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 28829CF80D445874061C5948E6A3751D
TEXT:
On Monday, Dec. 26, Abu Jandal al-Kuwaiti, an ISIL gang leader in Raqqah was struck and killed by a coalition airstrike near Tabqa Dam, Syria.

He was a previous member of the ISIL's War Committee and was involved in their retaking of Palmyra, Syria, before being reassigned to Tabqa to try to improve ISIL's defenses against the Syrian Democratic Forces.

Abu Jandal was involved in the use of suicide vehicles, IEDs and chemical weapons against the SDF. Because of his associations with ISIL terror attack planners and War Council members, his death will degrade ISIL's ability to defend Raqqah and launch external operations against the West.
ENTITIES:
coalition: Organisation, airstrike: Weapon, Tabqa Dam: Location, Tabqa Dam, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Abu Jandal: Person, Abu Jandal al-Kuwaiti: Person, Monday, Dec. 26: Temporal, Kuwaiti: Nationality, ISIL: Organisation, Raqqah: Location, He: Person, Syria: Location, Tabqa: Location, ISIL: Organisation, the Syrian Democratic Forces: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, the ISIL's War Committee: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, War Committee: Organisation, Palmyra, Syria: Location, Abu Jandal: Person, Abu: Person, suicide vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, suicide vehicles: Weapon, IEDs: Weapon, chemical weapons: Weapon, the SDF: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, his: Person, Raqqah: Location, the West: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, War Council: Organisation, his: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 482C10613016D2F430C464B2D13A8F41
TEXT:
On Dec. 6th, Iraqi Security Forces attempted to seize the Al Salem hospital complex from ISIL fighters in the heart of East Mosul. ISIL was using the hospital as a base of operations and command and control headquarters.  After seizing the area, the ISF fought off several counterattacks and six VBIEDs the following day before retrograding a short distance, under heavy enemy fire, to strengthen their position.

On Dec. 7th, after Iraqi forces continued to receive heavy and sustained machine gun and rocket propelled grenade fire from ISIL fighters in a building on the hospital complex, they requested immediate support from the Coalition. In support of the Iraqi Security Forces, Coalition aircraft conducted a precision strike on the location to target enemy fighters firing on Iraqi forces.

The Coalition complies with the Law of Armed Conflict and takes all feasible precautions during the planning and execution of airstrikes to reduce the risk of harm to non-combatants. We will continue to strike ISIL military targets in support of our partners in order to defeat ISIL in Iraq.
ENTITIES:
the heart of East Mosul: Location, East Mosul: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi Security Forces: Organisation, Dec. 6th: Temporal, the Al Salem hospital complex: Location, Al Salem: Organisation, ISIL fighters: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the hospital: Location, the area: Location, their position: Location, the ISF: Organisation, six: Quantity, VBIEDs: Weapon, the following day: Temporal, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL fighters: Organisation, a building on the hospital complex: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi forces: Organisation, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, Dec. 7th: Temporal, machine gun: Weapon, rocket propelled grenade: Weapon, enemy fighters: Organisation, the Iraqi Security Forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Coalition: Organisation, Coalition aircraft: Organisation, the location: Location, The Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, We: Organisation, Iraq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, our partners: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 5FBCC6E1D5B4B2A699196670789C6B0B
TEXT:
The Department of Defense announced today the death of a soldier who was supporting Operation Inherent Resolve.

Spc. Isiah L. Booker, of Cibolo, Texas, died Jan. 7, in Jordan, in a non-combat related incident. The incident is under investigation.

Booker was assigned to 2nd Battalion, 5th Special Forces Group, Fort Campbell, Kentucky.

For more information, media may contact the U.S. Army Special Operations Command Public Affairs Office at 910-432-3383.
ENTITIES:
The Department of Defense: Organisation, today: Temporal, Department of Defense: Organisation, a soldier: Person, Isiah L. Booker: Person, Cibolo, Texas: Location, Texas: Location, Jan: Person, Jan. 7: Temporal, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Person, Booker: Person, 2nd Battalion: Organisation, 5th Special Forces Group: Organisation, Special Forces Group: Organisation, Fort Campbell: Location, Fort Campbell, Kentucky: Location, Kentucky: Location, 910-432-3383: CommsIdentifier, media: Organisation, may: Person, U.S. Army Special Operations Command Public Affairs Office: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 6646F63F6AC6B483D15DA258CB182147
TEXT:
Defense Secretary Ash Carter today met with Iraqi Prime Minister‎ Haider al-Abadi in Baghdad, where the two leaders discussed the campaign to liberate the Iraqi city of Mosul from Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant terrorists and other issues, according to a Defense Department news release.    
The meeting focused on the military campaign to deliver ISIL a lasting defeat, and Carter complimented the prime minister on the performance of Iraqi security forces in the ongoing fight for Mosul, the release said.
The release said the two leaders discussed the next steps in the Mosul operation, including the need to continue the close cooperation between the Iraqi government and the Kurdistan regional government.
Carter thanked Abadi for nearly two years of a close personal partnership, and noted the continued supporting role the United States and the counter-ISIL coalition can play in Iraq's efforts to destroy the terrorist group, according to the release.
The secretary and Abadi agreed that there will still be work to rid Iraq of ISIL after the liberation of Mosul‎, and that a strong U.S.-Iraq partnership is critical to finish ISIL and address the security challenges that follow, the release said.
Later in the day, Carter flew to visit U.S. service members at Qayyarah Airfield West, also called “Q-West” in northern Iraq.
Also today, Carter commented on yesterday’s terrorist bombings in Istanbul, Turkey.
“On behalf of the Department of Defense, I want to convey my deepest condolences to the families of the victims in Saturday's cowardly terrorist attack in Istanbul,” the secretary said in a statement. “This attack only redoubles our resolve to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with our Turkish allies in condemning these attacks and relentlessly combating terrorism. We remain firmly committed to working closely with Turkey within NATO and the counter-ISIL coalition as well as bilaterally to combat such threats to security and stability.”
ENTITIES:
Defense Secretary Ash Carter: Person, Defense: Organisation, the two leaders: Organisation, the camp: Location, the Iraqi city of Mosul: Location, Iraqi city: Location, Mosul: Location, Ash Carter: Person, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant terrorists: Organisation, Defense Department: Organisation, Defense Department news release: DocumentReference, today: Temporal, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi Prime Minister‎ Haider al-Abadi: Person, Haider al-Abadi: Person, Baghdad: Location, the prime minister: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, Mosul: Location, military camp: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Carter: Person, the Iraqi government: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the Kurdistan regional government: Organisation, the two leaders: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Carter: Person, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, the counter-ISIL coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Abadi: Person, Iraq: Location, the terrorist group: Organisation, The secretary: Person, Mosul: Location, U.S.: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Abadi: Person, Iraq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Later in the day: Temporal, Q-West: Location, northern Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Carter: Person, U.S. service members: Organisation, Qayyarah Airfield West: Location, Carter: Person, Istanbul: Location, Istanbul, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Location, the victims: Organisation, the Department of Defense: Organisation, Istanbul: Location, the secretary: Person, Department of Defense: Organisation, I: Person, the families of the victims: Organisation, our: Organisation, our: Organisation, Turkish: Nationality, Turkish allies: Organisation, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, NATO: Organisation, the counter-ISIL coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 6874F49C56340E2BD65BF958916C97AE
TEXT:
On Thursday, Dec. 15, Coalition aircraft from CJTF-OIR destroyed 14 ISIL tanks and other equipment captured near Palmyra, Syria.

ISIL seized the tanks and other military hardware from Tiyas Military Airfield near Palmyra, Syria, between 11-13 Dec.

“The CJTF-OIR commanding general, Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, made it clear during his Dec.14th press conference that we would strike the equipment before it posed a threat to counter-ISIL operations,” said Col. John “J.D.” Dorrian, the CJTF-OIR spokesperson. “We will not allow ISIL to maintain capabilities that threaten Coalition or partner forces.”

The attacks occurred during daylight hours from late morning to early evening on Thursday. In addition to the 14 tanks, three artillery systems, two ISIL-held buildings, two tactical vehicles, and an air defense artillery system were also destroyed in the strike. The equipment was destroyed in the vicinity of the airfield, northeast of the city along a highway.

During the operation, 16 Coalition aircraft fired 22 munitions destroying 22 targets.
ENTITIES:
Palmyra: Location, Palmyra, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Coalition aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, Thursday, Dec. 15: Temporal, CJTF-OIR: Organisation, 14: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tanks: MilitaryPlatform, ISIL: Organisation, 11-13 Dec.: Temporal, the tanks: MilitaryPlatform, The CJTF-OIR commanding general: Person, Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend: Person, Stephen J. Townsend: Person, Dec.14th: Temporal, we: Organisation, other military hardware: Weapon, ISIL: Organisation, Col. John 'J.D.' Dorrian: Person, John: Person, the CJTF-OIR spokesperson: Person, Tiyas Military Airfield: Location, Palmyra: Location, Palmyra, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, We: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, partner forces: Organisation, daylight hours from late morning to early evening: Temporal, Thursday: Temporal, air defense artillery system: MilitaryPlatform, 14: Quantity, tanks: MilitaryPlatform, three: Quantity, artillery systems: MilitaryPlatform, two: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL-held buildings: Location, two: Quantity, tactical vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, the airfield: Location, northeast of the city: Location, the city: Location, a highway: Location, 16: Quantity, Coalition: Organisation, Coalition aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, 22: Quantity, munitions: Weapon, 22: Quantity, 

DOCUMENT: 68A04D0D3111DBD88DE961B5727ADFA4
TEXT:
Gen. Joseph L. Votel, U.S. Central Command commander, released the following statement today:

"We mourn the loss of one of our own, Navy Special Warfare Operator 1st Class Charles H. Keating IV, who was killed yesterday in northern Iraq. Petty Officer Keating was advising and assisting our Kurdish partners, in support of Operation Inherent Resolve."

"Keating's honorable and selfless service was in keeping with the finest traditions of military service and certainly will not be forgotten as we continue to put pressure on and ultimately eliminate the terrorists associated with ISIL. On behalf of the men and women of U.S. Central Command, I extend my personal gratitude and our deepest condolences to his family, friends and fellow service members."
ENTITIES:
Gen. Joseph L. Votel: Person, Navy: Organisation, Navy Special Warfare Operator 1st Class Charles H. Keating IV: Person, Special Warfare Operator: Organisation, 1st: Quantity, st Class: Vehicle, Charles: Person, H. Keating IV: Person, yesterday: Temporal, U.S. Central Command: Person, U.S. Central Command commander: Person, northern Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Joseph L. Votel: Person, today: Temporal, We: Organisation, Petty Officer Keating: Person, Keating: Person, our Kurdish partners: Organisation, Kurdish: Nationality, Keating: Person, we: Organisation, the terrorists associated with ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, service members: Organisation, U.S. Central Command: Organisation, I: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 6B183780227A18218A12E917A5BC8654
TEXT:
On Jan. 10, Coalition military forces conducted 23 strikes against ISIL terrorists in Syria and Iraq. In Syria, Coalition military forces conducted 15 strikes using attack, bomber, fighter and remotely piloted aircraft against ISIL targets. Additionally in Iraq, Coalition military forces conducted eight strikes coordinated with and in support of the government of Iraq using attack, bomber, fighter, and remotely piloted aircraft as well as rocket artillery against ISIL targets.
Syria
.       Near Ar Raqqah, five strikes engaged two ISIL tactical units and destroyed a front-end loader, a VBIED, a fighting position, and a tunnel entrance.
.       Near Ayn Isa, three strikes engaged two ISIL tactical units and destroyed a vehicle, five fighting positions, a command and control node, a VBIED, and a heavy machine gun.
.       Near Dayr Az Zayr, five strikes destroyed three oil well heads, 16 oil tanker trucks, two oil pump jacks, and an excavator.
.       Near Palmyra, two strikes engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed two tactical vehicles.
Iraq
.       Near Al Huwayjah, two strikes disabled two bridges.
.       Near Mosul, three strikes engaged three ISIL tactical units; destroyed four fighting positions, two vehicles, an ISIL-held building, and a rocket-propelled grenade launcher; and damaged 39 supply routes, three tunnels, and a front-end loader.
.       Near Rawah, one strike engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed a VBIED, a VBIED facility, and a UAV launch site.
.       Near Sinjar, one strike suppressed an ISIL tactical unit.
.       Near Tal Afar, one strike destroyed a VBIED factory.
Strike assessments are based on initial reports. All aircraft returned to base safely.
A strike, as defined in the CJTF releases, means one or more kinetic events that occur in roughly the same geographic location to produce a single, sometimes cumulative effect for that location.
So having a single aircraft deliver a single weapon against a lone ISIL vehicle is one strike, but so is multiple aircraft delivering dozens of weapons against a group of buildings and vehicles and weapon systems in a compound, for example, having the cumulative effect of making that facility (or facilities) harder or impossible to use.
Accordingly, CJTF-OIR does not report the number or type of aircraft employed in a strike, the number of munitions dropped in each strike, or the number of individual munition impact points against a target. The information used to compile the daily strike releases is based on 'Z' or Greenwich Mean Time.
Ground-based artillery fired in counter-fire or in fire support to maneuver roles are not classified as a strike as defined by CJTF-OIR.
The strikes were conducted as part of Operation Inherent Resolve, the operation to eliminate the ISIL terrorist group and the threat they pose to Iraq, Syria, and the wider international community.
The destruction of ISIL targets in Syria and Iraq further limits the group's ability to project terror and conduct operations. Coalition nations which have conducted strikes in Iraq include Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Coalition nations which have conducted strikes in Syria include Australia, Bahrain, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

ENTITIES:
Coalition military forces: Organisation, Jan. 10: Temporal, Jan: Person, 23: Quantity, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, Coalition military forces: Organisation, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL targets: Location, Syria: Location, 15: Quantity, strikes: Weapon, attack: MilitaryPlatform, bomber: MilitaryPlatform, fighter: MilitaryPlatform, remotely piloted aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, two: Quantity, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Palmyra: Location, two: Quantity, tactical vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, two bridges: Location, Al Huwayjah: Location, Al Huwayjah: Person, vehicles: Vehicle, an ISIL-held building: Location, ISIL: Organisation, three: Quantity, a rocket-propelled grenade launcher: Weapon, 39: Quantity, three: Quantity, tunnels: Location, a front-end loader: Vehicle, three: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, Mosul: Location, four: Quantity, fighting positions: Location, two: Quantity, strike: Weapon, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Rawah: Location, a VBIED: Weapon, a VBIED: Weapon, a VBIED facility: Location, a UAV: MilitaryPlatform, a UAV launch site: Location, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Sinjar: Location, the government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, attack: MilitaryPlatform, bomber: MilitaryPlatform, fighter: MilitaryPlatform, Iraq: Location, remotely piloted aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, rocket artillery: Weapon, Coalition military forces: Organisation, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL targets: Location, eight: Quantity, strikes: Weapon, a VBIED factory: Location, VBIED: Organisation, Tal Afar: Location, CJTF-OIR: Organisation, 'Z': Temporal, Greenwich: Location, Greenwich Mean Time: Temporal, Ground-based artillery: Weapon, CJTF-OIR: Organisation, Coalition nations: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, France: Location, France: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Organisation, the Netherlands: Location, the Netherlands: Organisation, the United Kingdom: Organisation, United Kingdom: Location, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, Iraq: Location, Australia: Location, Australia: Organisation, Belgium: Location, Belgium: Organisation, Canada: Location, Canada: Organisation, Denmark: Location, Denmark: Organisation, a fighting position: Location, a tunnel entrance: Location, two: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, Ar Raqqah: Location, a front-end loader: Vehicle, a VBIED: Weapon, command and control node: MilitaryPlatform, VBIED: Weapon, a heavy machine gun: Weapon, two: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, Ayn Isa: Location, Ayn: Person, vehicle: MilitaryPlatform, five: Quantity, Isa: Person, fighting positions: Location, an excavator: Vehicle, five: Quantity, three: Quantity, Dayr Az Zayr: Location, 16: Quantity, oil tanker trucks: Vehicle, two: Quantity, 

DOCUMENT: 76957901E4278B498901454FA209CFFA
TEXT:
A series of precision U.S. airstrikes against al-Qaida operatives this week in northwestern Syria’s Idlib province killed more than 20 militants and destroyed eight vehicles and nine structures, Pentagon Press Secretary Peter Cook told reporters today.     
A U.S. strike on Jan. 1 hit two al-Qaida vehicles that had departed a large al-Qaida headquarters near Sarmada, Syria, Cook said.
And, a Jan. 3 U.S. strike hit the headquarters compound itself, he added.
“Al-Qaida's foreign terrorist fighter network used this headquarters as a gathering place, and their leaders directed terrorist operations out of this location,” Cook said.
He added, “As you know, al-Qaida remains committed to carrying out terrorist attacks against the United States, our interests, and our allies and friends. We will continue to take actions to deny any safe haven for al-Qaida in Syria. We will not allow al-Qaida to grow its capacity to attack the United States or our allies around the world, and these strikes demonstrate that commitment.”       
Cook said the campaign against Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant terrorists is also progressing in both Iraq and Syria.
In the campaign to liberate the Iraqi city of Mosul, Iraqi security forces have made progress in liberating neighborhoods and in clearing areas already liberated, he said.
“They have further linked the various axes of advance into Mosul, which as we’ve mentioned previously makes the ISF’s job easier and ISIL’s job more difficult,” Cook said. “Of course, the global coalition continues to support Iraqi forces with air strikes -- eight in the last 24 hours in support of the Mosul operations -- as well as assistance from the ground.”       
In Syria, the press secretary said, Syrian democratic forces continue to liberate territory on the way to Raqqah.
“SDF forces have now advanced to within 7.5 kilometers of Tabqa Dam, and continue to make progress in clearing areas north and west of Raqqah,” Cook said. “In support of these operations, the coalition in the last 24 hours conducted 10 airstrikes, including strikes against both tactical units and the oil infrastructure that provides ISIL’s shrinking financial support."

ENTITIES:
Idlib: Location, Idlib province: Location, more than 20: Quantity, militants: Organisation, eight: Quantity, vehicles: Vehicle, nine: Quantity, structures: Location, Pentagon Press: Organisation, Pentagon Press Secretary Peter Cook: Person, ss Secretary: Vehicle, U.S.: Organisation, Peter Cook: Person, reporters: Organisation, today: Temporal, al-Qaida: Organisation, al-Qaida operatives: Organisation, this week: Temporal, northwestern Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Sarmada: Location, Sarmada, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Cook: Person, Jan: Person, Jan. 1: Temporal, U.S.: Organisation, two: Quantity, al-Qaida: Organisation, al-Qaida vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, a large al-Qaida headquarters: Location, strike: Weapon, al-Qaida: Organisation, 24 hours: Quantity, the global coalition: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi forces: Organisation, eight: Quantity, the last 24 hours: Temporal, Raqqah: Location, Syria: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian democratic forces: Organisation, SDF forces: Organisation, areas north and west of Raqqah: Location, Raqqah: Location, Cook: Person, 7.5 kilometers: Quantity, Tabqa Dam: Location, tactical units: Organisation, the oil infrastructure: Location, ISIL: Organisation, the coalition: Organisation, the last 24 hours: Temporal, 24 hours: Quantity, 10: Quantity, U.S.: Organisation, the headquarters compound: Location, he: Person, Jan: Person, Jan. 3: Temporal, Al-Qaida: Organisation, foreign terrorist fighter network: Organisation, this location: Location, Cook: Person, this headquarters: Location, He: Person, our allies and friends: Organisation, al-Qaida: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, We: Organisation, deny: Person, al-Qaida: Organisation, Syria: Location, We: Organisation, al-Qaida: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, our allies: Organisation, Cook: Person, the camp: Location, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, st Islamic: Vehicle, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, neighborhoods: Location, areas already liberated: Location, he: Person, the camp: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi city: Location, city of Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, the ISF: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Cook: Person, Mosul: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 8BC6B4D334BC5607D97A1BA18854B513
TEXT:
The Syrian Democratic Forces announced the start of the next phase of their operation to isolate ISIL's self-proclaimed capital of Raqqah, Dec. 10.

The SDF, made up in part by local Arabs and its Coalition trained and equipped Arab component, the Syrian Arab Coalition, and supported by Coalition advisers and air strikes began the operation to isolate Raqqah on Nov. 5.

In their march toward Raqqah, the SDF has already liberated dozens of villages and more than 700 square miles of ISIL-held terrain. Local Arab fighters continue to join the SDF and fight to liberate their own land.

During the initial phase of isolation efforts, our Syrian partners have proven their ability in battle, pushing ISIL back and destroying ISIL heavy weapons, vehicles, fortifications, IED facilities, VBIEDs, armored vehicles, technical vehicles, bridges, decoys, and caches.

The Coalition supports the SDF through training, advise and assist operations, airstrikes and material support to the SAC. Since the start of the operation the Coalition conducted more than 300 strikes delivering more than 850 munitions in support of its partners on the ground to enable the isolation of Raqqah and defeat of ISIL in Syria.
ENTITIES:
The Syrian Democratic Forces: Organisation, Raqqah: Location, Dec. 10: Temporal, Syrian: Nationality, ISIL: Organisation, The SDF: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, Coalition advisers: Organisation, air strikes: Weapon, Raqqah: Location, Nov. 5: Temporal, local Arabs: Organisation, ts Coalition: Vehicle, Coalition: Organisation, Arab: Nationality, Arab component: Organisation, the Syrian Arab Coalition: Organisation, Syrian Arab Coalition: Location, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL-held terrain: Location, Raqqah: Location, the SDF: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, dozens: Quantity, villages: Location, 700 square miles: Quantity, Local Arab fighters: Organisation, the SDF: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, Arab: Nationality, their own land: Location, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, heavy weapons: Weapon, vehicles: Vehicle, fortifications: Location, IED: Weapon, IED facilities: Location, VBIEDs: Weapon, armored vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, technical vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, bridges: Location, caches: Location, our Syrian partners: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, The Coalition: Organisation, the SAC: Organisation, the SDF: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, 850: Quantity, munitions: Weapon, its partners on the ground: Organisation, Raqqah: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, 300: Quantity, 

DOCUMENT: B2E5F55F5D7E31B291D9F76E8E4AC75D
TEXT:
The Syrian Democratic Forces announced that they began their advance to isolate Raqqah, Syria, Nov. 6, 2016.  The Coalition is supporting the SDF by providing air and advise and assist support.  The Arab element of the SDF is indigenous to the area and will help establish regional support for SDF operations.  The isolation of Raqqah, when complete, will liberate strategically valuable terrain surrounding Raqqah and enable the liberation of the city.  Ultimately, the liberation of Raqqah will free Syrians to return to a life free from Islamic State of Iraq and Levant atrocities and deny ISIL a safe haven to plot external attacks against the West.

The Combined Joint Task Force – Inherent Resolve Commander, Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, provided the following statement on the SDF advance:

"‎The Syrian Democratic Forces have begun their operation to isolate the city of Raqqah and other ISIL-held territory in Syria. In addition to setting conditions for the ultimate liberation of Raqqah, ISIL’s self-proclaimed capital, the operation will also cut off militants from ISIL in Mosul, Iraq.  Throughout each phase of the campaign to liberate Raqqah, the Coalition will continually consult with allies and partners as we plan for the city’s ultimate seizure and governance once ISIL is defeated. We are confident that this next phase will continue the momentum that the Coalition and our partners have achieved, and that together we will deliver ISIL a lasting defeat."
ENTITIES:
The Syrian Democratic Forces: Organisation, 2016: Temporal, Syrian: Nationality, they: Organisation, Raqqah: Location, Syria: Location, Nov. 6, 2016: Temporal, The Coalition: Organisation, the SDF: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, The Arab element of the SDF: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, indigenous: Nationality, Arab: Nationality, the area: Location, SDF: Organisation, the city: Location, Raqqah: Location, terrain surrounding Raqqah: Location, Iraq: Location, deny: Person, ISIL: Organisation, the West: Location, Raqqah: Location, Syrians: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and Levant: Organisation, Islamic State: Organisation, The Combined Joint Task Force: Organisation, Joint Task Force: Organisation, SDF: Organisation, The Syrian Democratic Forces: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, the city: Location, the city of Raqqah: Location, ISIL: Organisation, territory in Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Inherent Resolve: Organisation, Inherent Resolve Commander: Person, Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend: Person, Stephen J. Townsend: Person, militants: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Iraq: Location, Raqqah: Location, ISIL’s self-proclaimed capital: Location, ISIL: Organisation, allies and partners: Organisation, we: Organisation, the city: Location, ISIL: Organisation, the camp: Location, Raqqah: Location, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, our partners: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: C044623AD872323AF717F26F21E9352B
TEXT:
U.S. forces will join Jordan in Exercise Eager Lion 16, one of U.S. Central Command's premiere exercises, in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan from May 15-24. 

Exercise Eager Lion 16 will consist of a week-long series of simulated scenarios to facilitate a coordinated partnered military response to conventional and unconventional threats. The scenarios developed will include border security, command and control, cyber defense and battlespace management. 

About 6,000 military personnel, including representatives from USCENTCOM headquarters and its air, land and maritime components, will support the exercise.
ENTITIES:
U.S. forces: Organisation, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan: Location,  : Organisation, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan: Location, May 15: Temporal, May 15-24: Temporal, Jordan: Organisation, Jordan: Person, U.S. Central Command: Organisation, Central Command: Organisation, 6,000: Quantity, USCENTCOM: Organisation, USCENTCOM headquarters: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: D21D5CC3C9BEF5BF1D44976154E580A5
TEXT:
BAGHDAD - Combined Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve provided more than 24,000 protective chemical masks to the Iraqi security forces and Peshmerga during training in preparation for the Mosul offensive.

The use of chemical weapons by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant reinforces why the international coalition is assisting the Iraqi government to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, which continues to kill indiscriminately and is completely unencumbered by any legal or moral restraint.

"The enemy has used chemical weapons in the past, and we're going to make sure we are taking every measure to mitigate the risk to our forces," said Maj. Gen. Gary J. Volesky, commander, Combined Joint Forces Land Component Command - Operation Inherent Resolve. "Force protection is my number one priority here."

CJTF-OIR has five building partner capacity sites, which were instrumental in training Iraqi security forces and Peshmerga counter-attack brigades for the Mosul offensive.

Part of their training includes reacting to chemical attacks by ISIL and effectively using and fighting in their issued gas masks.

"The Coalition is trained. We've trained the ISF and Peshmerga; they've got equipment," said Volesky. "We're confident that as the enemy attempt to use a lot of means - not just chemicals - we're targeting the training with the Iraqis and with the Coalition to make sure we're mitigating any risk of that threat."
ENTITIES:
BAGHDAD: Location, Combined Joint Task Force: Organisation, the Iraqi security forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Peshmerga: Organisation, Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent: Organisation, Mosul: Location, 24,000: Quantity, chemical weapons: Weapon, the Iraqi government: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, ISIL: Organisation, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, the international coalition: Organisation, The enemy: Organisation, our forces: Organisation, Maj. Gen. Gary J. Volesky: Person, Gary J. Volesky: Person, Combined Joint Forces Land Component Command: Organisation, Joint Forces Land Component Command: Organisation, my: Person, CJTF: Organisation, Peshmerga counter-attack brigades: Organisation, five: Quantity, Mosul: Location, building partner capacity sites: Location, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, their: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, their: Organisation, The Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, We: Organisation, the ISF: Organisation, ISF: Organisation, Peshmerga: Organisation, they: Organisation, Volesky: Person, We: Organisation, the Iraqis: Organisation, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, we: Organisation, the enemy: Organisation, chemicals: Weapon, we: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: D52939C747F4DB8D1ECF6D415559ADA0
TEXT:
In the past 24 hours, Iraqi forces maintained their defensive positions against Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant fighters on three sides of Mosul, the country’s second-largest city, Pentagon press operations director Navy Capt. Jeff Davis said today.    
ISIL has had control of Mosul for two years, and the Iraqis have cleared 15 to 20 percent of the city of enemy forces since the liberation of the city began Oct. 17, Davis said.
Also in the past 24 hours, Davis said, the U.S.-led 
coalition
 conducted five airstrikes, delivering 101 munitions. These strikes engaged three ISIL tactical units, four ISIL vehicles, four enemy mortar systems, four ISIL-held buildings, three rocket-propelled grenades, two vehicle-borne homemade bombs, two front-end loaders, a tunnel, a land bridge and a supply cache; damaged 13 supply routes; and suppressed three ISIL tactical units, he added.
Davis said the number of munitions delivered in support of the liberation 
campaign
 now totals 6,602. The airstrikes have destroyed 967 vehicle bombs, 111 tunnels, 274 vehicles, 280 bunkers, 20 anti-aircraft artillery systems and 224 artillery and mortar systems, he said.
Raqqa in Next Isolation Phase
Elsewhere in the campaign to defeat ISIL, the Syrian Democratic Forces have begun the third phase of the effort to isolate the city of Raqqa, a self-proclaimed ISIL capital in Syria. Many Arab citizens who have been liberated from villages around Raqqa are seeking to join the SDF’s fight against ISIL, Davis said.
The SDF have regained about 300 square miles since the isolation of Raqqa began early last month, Davis said.
In the past 24 hours, the U.S.-led coalition’s four airstrikes delivered 24 munitions against ISIL targets, which include three tactical units, a command-and-control node and five supply routes in support of SDF operations to isolate Raqqa, Davis said. The most recent airstrikes bring the total number of munitions in support of the SDF since Dec. 5 to 922, he added.

ENTITIES:
24 hours: Quantity, Mosul: Location, the country’s second-largest city: Location, largest city: Location, Pentagon: Organisation, Pentagon press operations director Navy Capt.: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi forces: Organisation, Navy: Organisation, defensive positions: Location, past 24 hours: Temporal, st Islamic: Vehicle, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant fighters: Organisation, Jeff Davis: Person, 24 hours: Quantity, three: Quantity, tactical units: Organisation, a command-and-control node: Location, five: Quantity, SDF: Organisation, the U.S.-led coalition: Organisation, Raqqa: Location, Davis: Person, the past 24 hours: Temporal, four: Quantity, 24: Quantity, munitions: Weapon, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, 922: Quantity, munitions: Weapon, the SDF: Organisation, Dec. 5: Temporal, ISIL: Organisation, enemy forces: Organisation, the city: Location, Oct. 17: Temporal, Davis: Person, Mosul: Location, two years: Temporal, the Iraqis: Organisation, 15 to 20 percent: Quantity, the city: Location, 101 munitions: Weapon, 24 hours: Quantity, Davis: Person, the U.S.-led : Organisation, U.S.-led: Location, coalition: Organisation, the past 24 hours: Temporal, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL-held buildings: Location, three: Quantity, rocket-propelled grenades: Weapon, two: Quantity, vehicle-borne homemade bombs: Weapon, two: Quantity, front-end loaders: Weapon, a tunnel: Location, three: Quantity, a land bridge: Location, a supply cache: Location, 13: Quantity, supply routes: Location, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, three: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, he: Person, four: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, strikes: Weapon, four: Quantity, mortar: Weapon, four: Quantity, Davis: Person, munitions: Weapon, 6,602: Quantity, 224: Quantity, artillery and mortar systems: Weapon, he: Person, 967: Quantity, vehicle bombs: Weapon, 111: Quantity, 274: Quantity, vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, 280: Quantity, 20: Quantity, anti-aircraft artillery systems: Weapon, Raqqa: Location, the city: Location, the city of Raqqa: Location, Raqqa: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, the camp: Location, ISIL: Organisation, the Syrian Democratic Forces: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Davis: Person, villages around Raqqa: Location, Arab citizens: Organisation, Arab: Nationality, Raqqa: Location, SDF: Organisation, The SDF: Organisation, 300 square miles: Quantity, Raqqa: Location, Davis: Person, 

DOCUMENT: E19357552CAE0E45EE364E60A317AC59
TEXT:
The French anti-air frigate FS Forbin joined U.S. Naval Forces Central Command's (NAVCENT) Task Force (CTF) 50 on Dec. 27.
The integration of FS Forbin marks the first time a French unit has integrated with the task force while being led by the Royal Navy. The French previously led CTF 50 last December, commanding it from the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier FS Charles de Gaulle.
"Forbin is committed to working together with the U.S. and Royal Navy," said Capt. Christophe Cluzel, commander of Forbin. "France continues to value the partnerships with our allies in order to protect the maritime domain."
Forbin is joining U.S. ships USS Hopper (DDG 70), USS Mahan (DDG 72), and U.K. ships HMS Ocean (L 12) and HMS Daring (D 32). The U.S., French and Royal Navy are working together in support of maritime security operations and theater security cooperation efforts in the U.S. 5th Fleet area of operations.
CTF 50 is currently led by Commodore Andrew Burns, commander of the Amphibious Task Group, embarked on the U.K.'s large-deck amphibious assault ship HMS Ocean.
"I am delighted that FS Forbin will be operating as part of CTF 50 and looking forward to the contribution she will make to ongoing U.S., U.K. and French maritime security operations in the Gulf," said Burns. "Her integration will reinforce our already strong bonds and advance the progress in interoperability made to date."
CTF 50 will lead a multilateral exercise early next year, Unified Trident, encompassing other NAVCENT CTFs as well as French and Royal Navy assets. The exercise is intended to enhance mutual capabilities, improve tactical proficiency and strengthen partnerships in ensuring the free flow of commerce and freedom of navigation.
NAVCENT is responsible for approximately 2.5 million square miles of area including the Arabian Gulf, Gulf of Oman, North Arabian Sea, Gulf of Aden and the Red Sea. NAVCENT's mission is to conduct maritime security operations, theater security cooperation efforts, and strengthen partner nation's maritime capabilities in order to promote security and stability in the U.S. 5th Fleet area of operations.
ENTITIES:
The French anti-air frigate FS Forbin: MilitaryPlatform, Dec. 27: Temporal, French: Nationality, U.S. Naval Forces Central Command: Organisation, NAVCENT: Organisation, Task Force: Organisation, Task Force (CTF) 50: Organisation, the Royal Navy: Organisation, Royal Navy: Organisation, FS Forbin: MilitaryPlatform, a French unit: MilitaryPlatform, French: Nationality, the task force: Organisation, Her: Person, our: Organisation, CTF 50: Organisation, French: Nationality, French and Royal Navy assets: MilitaryPlatform, Royal Navy: Organisation, early next year: Temporal, Unified Trident: Person, NAVCENT CTFs: Organisation, NAVCENT: Organisation, Gulf of Oman: Location, Oman: Location, North Arabian Sea: Location, Gulf of Aden: Location, the Red Sea: Location, 2.5 million square miles: Quantity, area: Location, the Arabian Gulf: Location, Arabian Gulf: Location, NAVCENT: Organisation, partner nation: Organisation, U.S: Organisation, U.S. 5th Fleet: Organisation, U.S. 5th Fleet area of operations: Location, Fleet: Organisation, The French: Organisation, FS Charles de Gaulle: MilitaryPlatform, FS Charles de Gaulle: Organisation, CTF 50: Organisation, last December: Temporal, st December: Vehicle, French: Nationality, the U.S.: Organisation, Royal Navy: Organisation, Capt.: Person, Christophe Cluzel: Person, France: Location, France: Organisation, our allies: Organisation, Forbin: MilitaryPlatform, HMS Daring: MilitaryPlatform, D 32: MilitaryPlatform, U.S: Organisation, U.S. ships: Organisation, ps USS: Vehicle, USS Hopper: MilitaryPlatform, DDG 70: MilitaryPlatform, USS Mahan: MilitaryPlatform, SS Mahan: Vehicle, DDG 72: MilitaryPlatform, U.K. ships: Organisation, ps HMS: Vehicle, HMS Ocean: MilitaryPlatform, L 12: MilitaryPlatform, The U.S.: Organisation, French: Nationality, French: Organisation, the U.S. 5th Fleet: Organisation, the U.S. 5th Fleet area of operations: Location, U.S: Organisation, Fleet: Organisation, Royal Navy: Organisation, CTF 50: Organisation, the U.K.'s large-deck amphibious assault ship: MilitaryPlatform, HMS Ocean: MilitaryPlatform, Commodore Andrew Burns: Person, commander of the Amphibious Task Group: Person, the Amphibious Task Group: Organisation, Amphibious Task Group: Organisation, she: MilitaryPlatform, U.S., U.K. and French maritime security operations: Organisation, French: Nationality, the Gulf: Location, Gulf: Location, Burns: Person, FS Forbin: MilitaryPlatform, CTF 50: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: E50B8563BB8395102D95333699FF73A3
TEXT:
Ninety-Four Citizen Airmen from the 507th Air Refueling Wing here departed for a deployment to Incirlik Air Base, Turkey to support Operation Inherent Resolve with KC-135R Stratotanker air refueling support. 

The group of Reserve Airmen, made up of a mix of operations group and maintenance group professionals is one of the largest groups to leave from Tinker this year to support ongoing operations against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. 

“The nation’s business is why we are all here,” said Col. Travis Caughlin, 507th Maintenance Group Commander. “We’ve spent a long time training and preparing and it’s very worthwhile when you get to go execute what’s really going on. It doesn’t get any more real than this.”

The group plans to be deployed two months, which is shorter than previous deployments in Air Force Reserve Command. This realignment is partially designed to improve operations by keeping maintenance and operations teams together both during the deployment and when training at home station. 

While the deployment may be shorter, the 507th ARW will be deploying again with a large contingent of the wing deploying again in the summer of 2017. With operations in Southwest Asia continuing, support from the Air Reserve Component is vital according to wing leadership. 

“I’m convinced tankers are the key to global reach, “Caughlin said. “If we don’t get there, fighters, bombers, and airlifters won’t get there without the tanker. We’ve got to get that gas to the warfighter.”
ENTITIES:
Ninety-Four Citizen Airmen: Organisation, Turkey: Location, KC-135R: MilitaryPlatform, KC-135R Stratotanker: MilitaryPlatform, the 507th Air Refueling Wing: Organisation, 507th Air Refueling Wing: Organisation, Incirlik Air Base: Location, Incirlik Air Base, Turkey: Location, The group of Reserve Airmen: Organisation, Tinker: Location, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, operations group: Organisation, maintenance group: Organisation, there: Location, fighters: MilitaryPlatform, bombers: MilitaryPlatform, we: Organisation, airlifters: MilitaryPlatform, there: Location, the tanker: Vehicle, We: Organisation, the warfighter: Organisation, The nation: Organisation, we: Organisation, here: Location, Col. Travis Caughlin: Person, Travis Caughlin: Person, 507th Maintenance Group Commander: Person, Maintenance Group Commander: Organisation, We: Organisation, The group: Organisation, two months: Temporal, Air Force Reserve Command: Organisation, operations teams: Organisation, the summer of 2017: Temporal, 2017: Temporal, may: Person, 507th ARW: Organisation, a large contingent of the wing: Organisation, Southwest Asia: Location, the Air Reserve Component: Organisation, Air Reserve Component: Organisation, I: Person, Caughlin: Person, 

DOCUMENT: E9035FF1D0DA74A11674C82688C05C51
TEXT:
U.S. Air Forces Central Command will release the results of the September 17 Dayr az Zawr, Syria airstrike investigation on a live, on-the-record conference call open to journalists, starting at 10 a.m. Nov. 29, 2016. 
 
During the call, Brig. Gen. Richard "Tex" Coe, the lead investigating officer, will present the findings and recommendations. Questions from the Pentagon Press to the investigating officer will follow Brig. Gen. Coe’s extended opening statement, and Col. John J. Thomas, Central Command spokesman will moderate.
 
The call is scheduled to last 45 minutes. Those able to participate should dial 888-847-6592. When prompted, enter Passcode 3080897. It is recommended to dial in 15 minutes prior to the call. Each individual calling in will be asked to identify themselves and media affiliation into a recording before being automatically connected.
 
Pentagon Press will gather around the call in the Press Briefing Room and be called on to ask their questions by Navy Capt. Jeff Davis who will also be in the room at the Pentagon. Time permitting, journalists outside the Pentagon will also be able to ask questions.
ENTITIES:
U.S. Air Forces Central Command: Organisation, U.S.: Nationality, journalists: Organisation, 10 a.m.: Temporal, Air Forces Central Command: Organisation, September 17: Temporal, Dayr az Zawr: Location, Dayr az Zawr, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Nov. 29, 2016: Temporal, 2016: Temporal, 15 minutes: Quantity, 15 minutes: Temporal, Pentagon Press: Organisation, Navy: Organisation, Navy Capt.: Person, the Press Briefing Room: Location, ss Briefing: Vehicle, Jeff Davis: Person, the room: Location, the Pentagon: Location, Pentagon: Organisation, journalists: Organisation, the Pentagon: Organisation, Pentagon: Organisation, Brig.: Person, Richard 'Tex' Coe: Person, the Pentagon Press: Organisation, Pentagon Press: Organisation, the investigating officer will follow Brig.: Person, Gen. Coe: Person, Col. John J. Thomas: Person, John J. Thomas: Person, Coe’s: Person, Central Command: Organisation, Central Command spokesman: Person, 45 minutes: Quantity, 45 minutes: Temporal, 888-847-6592: CommsIdentifier, Passcode 3080897: DocumentReference, 

DOCUMENT: F5B5E86320A4E95E92A7EA2FB8E8B484
TEXT:
On Jan. 9, Coalition military forces conducted 26 strikes against ISIL terrorists in Syria and Iraq. In Syria, Coalition military forces conducted 15 strikes using attack, bomber, fighter and remotely piloted aircraft against ISIL targets. Additionally in Iraq, Coalition military forces conducted 11 strikes coordinated with and in support of the government of Iraq using attack, bomber, fighter, and remotely piloted aircraft as well as rocket artillery against ISIL targets.
Syria
. Near Ar Raqqah, 12 strikes engaged six ISIL tactical units; destroyed an IED, seven fighting positions, and a VBIED; and damaged four supply routes.
. Near Ayn Isa, one strike destroyed a VBIED and an ISIL tactical vehicle.
. Near Dayr Az Zayr, one strike destroyed an oil pump jack.
. Near Palmyra, one strike destroyed two ISIL weapons caches.
Iraq
. Near Al Huwayjah, one strike engaged an ISIL tactical unit and destroyed an ISIL-held building.
. Near Mosul, seven strikes engaged four ISIL tactical units; destroyed a fighting position, a heavy machine gun, seven ISIL-held buildings, four VBIEDs, a VBIED facility, two weapons caches, three tactical vehicles, a tunnel entrance, and a mortar; damaged 18 supply routes; and suppressed two mortar teams and an ISIL tactical unit.
. Near Tal Afar, three strikes destroyed an ISIL-held building and four UAV construction facilities.
Strike assessments are based on initial reports. All aircraft returned to base safely.
A strike, as defined in the CJTF releases, means one or more kinetic events that occur in roughly the same geographic location to produce a single, sometimes cumulative effect for that location.
So having a single aircraft deliver a single weapon against a lone ISIL vehicle is one strike, but so is multiple aircraft delivering dozens of weapons against a group of buildings and vehicles and weapon systems in a compound, for example, having the cumulative effect of making that facility (or facilities) harder or impossible to use.
Accordingly, CJTF-OIR does not report the number or type of aircraft employed in a strike, the number of munitions dropped in each strike, or the number of individual munition impact points against a target. The information used to compile the daily strike releases is based on 'Z' or Greenwich Mean Time.
Ground-based artillery fired in counter-fire or in fire support to maneuver roles are not classified as a strike as defined by CJTF-OIR.
The strikes were conducted as part of Operation Inherent Resolve, the operation to eliminate the ISIL terrorist group and the threat they pose to Iraq, Syria, and the wider international community.
The destruction of ISIL targets in Syria and Iraq further limits the group's ability to project terror and conduct operations. Coalition nations which have conducted strikes in Iraq include Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Coalition nations which have conducted strikes in Syria include Australia, Bahrain, Canada, Denmark, France, Jordan, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

ENTITIES:
Coalition military forces: Organisation, Jan: Person, Jan. 9: Temporal, 26: Quantity, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL terrorists: Organisation, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, seven: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL-held buildings: Location, seven: Quantity, four: Quantity, VBIEDs: Weapon, a VBIED facility: Location, two: Quantity, weapons caches: Location, three: Quantity, tactical vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, a tunnel entrance: Location, a mortar: Weapon, 18: Quantity, two: Quantity, mortar teams: Organisation, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, four: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Mosul: Organisation, a fighting position: Location, a heavy machine gun: Weapon, three: Quantity, strikes: Weapon, an ISIL-held building: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Tal Afar: Location, four: Quantity, UAV: MilitaryPlatform, UAV: Organisation, UAV construction facilities: Location, base: Location, aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, the government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, attack, bomber, fighter, and remotely piloted aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, Iraq: Location, rocket artillery: Weapon, Coalition military forces: Organisation, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, 11: Quantity, Coalition nations: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, France: Location, France: Organisation, Jordan: Organisation, Jordan: Person, the Netherlands: Location, the Netherlands: Organisation, Netherlands: Organisation, Saudi Arabia: Location, Saudi Arabia: Organisation, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, United Arab Emirates: Location, United Arab Emirates: Organisation, the United Kingdom: Organisation, United Kingdom: Location, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, Syria: Location, Australia: Location, Australia: Organisation, Bahrain: Location, Bahrain: Organisation, Canada: Location, Canada: Organisation, Denmark: Location, Denmark: Organisation, a VBIED: Weapon, four: Quantity, 12: Quantity, six: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL tactical units: Organisation, Ar Raqqah: Location, IED: Weapon, seven: Quantity, fighting positions: Location, a VBIED: Weapon, an ISIL tactical vehicle: MilitaryPlatform, Ayn Isa: Location, Ayn: Person, ISIL: Organisation, Isa: Person, Dayr Az Zayr: Location, two: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL weapons caches: Location, Palmyra: Location, Iraq: Location, one: Quantity, strike: Weapon, an ISIL tactical unit: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Al Huwayjah: Location, Al Huwayjah: Person, an ISIL-held building: Location, ISIL: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: F7893F2F4E38C8E00C7D22E22E100428
TEXT:
U.S. Army General Joseph Votel, commander, U.S. Central Command recently met with U.S. Air Force civilian employees and provided an overview of the CENTCOM vision, the current mission, and strategic approach.
 
Votel explained U.S. Central Command’s top priorities:

- Ensure an effective posture.

- Strengthen relationships with allies.

- Deter and counter state aggression.

- Disrupt and counter violent extremism.

Votel expressed his desire that the command attracts and retains the very best people to support these critical priorities and that they are fully enabled to develop and contribute to the mission.

He further stressed the need to develop our future leaders through timely feedback from supervisors, mentorship programs, and opportunities and resources for growth, while noting the importance of timely and appropriate recognition for superior performance throughout an employee’s tenure with the command.

The command intends to hold three town halls next year with varying agendas to convey useful information to the civilian workforce and to take questions and recommendations.
ENTITIES:
U.S. Army General Joseph: Organisation, U.S. Army General Joseph Votel: Person, CENTCOM: Organisation, Joseph Votel: Person, U.S. Central Command: Organisation, U.S. Central Command: Person, U.S. Air Force civilian employees: Organisation, Air Force: Organisation, Votel: Person, U.S. Central Command: Organisation, allies: Organisation, Votel: Person, He: Person, the command: Organisation, The command: Organisation, the civilian workforce: Organisation, next year: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: F7AC57DBBAD0284C8C0DE6566B9B5C29
TEXT:
The Defense Department has identified the American service member who was killed in Syria on Thanksgiving Day.

 Operation Inherent Resolve - Targeted Operations Against ISIL Terrorists
Navy Senior Chief Petty Officer Scott C. Dayton, 42, of Woodbridge, Virginia, died Nov. 24 in northern Syria, of wounds sustained in an improvised explosive device blast, according to a DoD news release issued yesterday.

Dayton, who was supporting Operation Inherent Resolve, was assigned to Explosive Ordnance Disposal Mobile Unit Two, which is based in Virginia Beach, Virginia, the release said.

On Thanksgiving Day, Defense Secretary Ash Carter offered his condolences to Dayton’s family, friends and other loved ones.

“I am deeply saddened by the news on this Thanksgiving Day that one of our brave service members has been killed in Syria while protecting us from the evil of ISIL,” Carter said in a Nov. 24 statement. “It is a painful reminder of the dangers our men and women in uniform face around the world to keep us safe.”

The secretary added, “Please keep this service member's family, friends and teammates in your thoughts and prayers, and this Thanksgiving I hope you will join me in expressing thanks to all of our dedicated troops who selflessly protect us every day.”

Dayton was mortally wounded in the vicinity of Ayn Issa in northern Syria, according to a Combined Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve news release.

“The entire counter-ISIL coalition sends our condolences to this hero's family, friends and teammates,” Army Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, commander of Combined Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve, said in the release. “On this Thanksgiving, please be thankful that there are service members willing to take up the fight to protect our homeland from ISIL's hateful and brutal ideology.”
ENTITIES:
The Defense Department: Organisation, the American service member: Person, Defense Department: Organisation, American: Nationality, Syria: Location, Thanksgiving Day: Temporal, Scott C. Dayton: Person, 42: Quantity, Woodbridge, Virginia: Location, Virginia: Person, Nov. 24: Temporal, northern Syria: Location, Syria: Location, improvised explosive device: Weapon, DoD: Organisation, yesterday: Temporal, Targeted Operations Against ISIL Terrorists Navy: Organisation, ISIL Terrorists: Organisation, Navy Senior Chief Petty Officer Scott C. Dayton: Person, Dayton: Location, Dayton: Person, Virginia Beach: Location, Virginia Beach, Virginia: Location, Virginia: Person, Operation Inherent Resolve: Organisation, Explosive Ordnance Disposal Mobile Unit Two: Organisation, Defense: Organisation, Defense Secretary Ash Carter: Person, Thanksgiving Day: Temporal, Ash Carter: Person, Dayton’s family, friends and other loved ones: Organisation, Dayton’s: Person, s family: Organisation, I: Person, Syria: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Carter: Person, a Nov. 24 statement: DocumentReference, Nov. 24: Temporal, this Thanksgiving Day: Temporal, one of our brave service members: Person, our men and women in uniform: Organisation, The secretary: Person, this Thanksgiving: Temporal, I: Person, hope: Person, me: Person, s family: Organisation, Dayton: Person, the vicinity of Ayn Issa: Location, Ayn: Person, northern Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Combined Joint Task Force: Organisation, Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve: Organisation, Army: Organisation, Army Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend: Person, my Lt: Vehicle, Stephen J. Townsend: Person, counter-ISIL coalition: Organisation, Combined Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve: Organisation, Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, this hero: Person, s family: Organisation, our homeland: Location, ISIL: Organisation, this Thanksgiving: Temporal, service members: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: FEB7BC61C9765C9859F46B9B634F039F
TEXT:
Air Force F-16 Fighting Falcons from the Vermont Air National Guard arrived here Dec. 10, 2016, to join the fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant in support of Operation Inherent Resolve.    
Accompanying the aircraft were 300 ANG Airmen, deployed from the 158th Fighter Wing, who will comprise the 134th Expeditionary Fighter Squadron, which will fly strike missions against ISIL as part of the 407th Air Expeditionary Group.   “We are excited to generate, execute, and sustain decisive combat airpower through this expeditionary fighter squadron,” said. Col. David C. Lyons, 407th AEG commander. “The capability these total force Airmen provide through the use of precision airstrikes will aid in denying ISIL safe haven and provide ground forces in Iraq and Syria the opportunity to conduct localized counter attacks.”  The squadron will accompany Coalition partners flying in support of OIR at the deployed location. To date, about 60 regional and international nations have joined together to counter ISIL’s campaign in Iraq and Syria  “ISIL continues to pose a threat to the international community, but the Men and Women of the 407th AEG, together with our Joint and Coalition partners, are working hard to defeat and destroy Da’esh,” Lyons said. 

ENTITIES:
Air Force F-16 Fighting Falcons: MilitaryPlatform, Air Force: Organisation, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, the Vermont Air National Guard: Organisation, Vermont Air National Guard: Organisation, here: Location, Dec. 10, 2016: Temporal, 2016: Temporal, the 134th Expeditionary Fighter Squadron: Organisation, 134th Expeditionary Fighter Squadron: Organisation, the aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, the 407th Air Expeditionary Group: Organisation, 407th Air Expeditionary Group: Organisation, 300: Quantity, 300 ANG: Money, 300 ANG Airmen: Organisation, ANG Airmen: Organisation, the 158th Fighter Wing: Organisation, 158th Fighter Wing: Organisation, We: Organisation, this expeditionary fighter squadron: Organisation, Col. David C. Lyons: Person, 407th AEG commander: Person, AEG: Organisation, David C. Lyons: Person, ISIL: Organisation, ground forces: Organisation, Iraq: Location, these total force Airmen: Organisation, Syria: Location, The squadron: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, Coalition partners: Organisation, OIR: Organisation, the deployed location: Location, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, ISIL: Organisation, 60: Quantity, the international community: Organisation, regional and international nations: Organisation, the Men and Women: Organisation, 407th AEG: Organisation, Joint and Coalition partners: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, Da’esh: Organisation, Lyons: Person, ISIL: Organisation, s camp: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 26E0189E3D774CB2B8F078A082E5088C
TEXT:
The European Union has been among those calling for a new cessation of hostilities in Syria ever since the last one broke down in September. In this context, the announcement of an agreement for cessation of hostilities on the eve of a New Year is welcome. 
What matters first and foremost is that it can be implemented fully and by all the parties to the conflict. Reports of continued air strikes and fighting in Wadi Barada are a matter of concern. But if implemented fully, the cessation can open the way to unhindered and countrywide humanitarian access to those in need.And, most of all, if successful it can open the way to a renewal of intra-Syrian talks under UN auspices, within the framework set by the UN Security Council.In this respect, we would welcome any intermediate step facilitated by other international players, such as the announced meeting in Astana, if fully inclusive and aimed at preparing a fruitful and meaningful  resumption of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva under UN auspices.To this aim, I have spoken today to Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu and to the UN Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, to coordinate our work for Syria.The European Union is continuing its work with the regional parties. We will host in Brussels in mid January a round of bilateral talks to find common ground on the post conflict in Syria, and on reconciliation and reconstruction, in full coordination and support of the talks that will be held in Geneva in February.In addition, the EU will be hosting a conference in Brussels, follow-up to last year's London conference on Syria, in spring. The EU has and will continue to be the biggest humanitarian aid donor in Syria and in the neighbouring countries with over 9 billion euros committed since the start of the crisis.But our aim and role is not only humanitarian. It is most of all to contribute, in coordination with others, to a negotiated peace for a united and democratic Syria, and to help the Syrian people to rebuild their country once the political conditions are in place. This is also the only way to achieve a decisive defeat of Daesh in Syria. 

ENTITIES:
The European Union: Organisation, September: Temporal, European Union: Organisation, Syria: Location, the eve of a New Year: Temporal, eve: Person, all the parties: Organisation, air strikes: Weapon, Wadi Barada: Location, Syrian: Nationality, UN: Organisation, the UN Security Council: Organisation, UN Security Council: Organisation, we: Organisation, other international players: Organisation, Astana: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Geneva: Location, Geneva: Person, UN: Organisation, I: Person, today: Temporal, Turkish: Nationality, Turkish Foreign Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu: Person, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu: Person, the UN Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura: Person, UN Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syria.The: Organisation, The European Union: Organisation, European Union: Organisation, the regional parties: Organisation, We: Organisation, Syria: Location, Brussels: Location, Geneva: Location, Geneva: Person, February: Temporal, the EU: Organisation, mid January: Temporal, Brussels: Location, last year: Temporal, London: Location, Syria: Location, spring: Temporal, The EU: Organisation, over 9 billion euros: Money, Syria: Location, the neighbouring countries: Location, Syria: Location, the Syrian people: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, their country: Location, Daesh: Organisation, Syria: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 8BF4B60AA80B0601BE12F0164E2E7001
TEXT:
This week sees the start of a second round of talks in the framework of the European Union's Regional Initiative on the future of Syria, High Representative Federica Mogherini’s initiative to identify post-conflict arrangements for the country.
A series of bilateral meetings will take place between senior officials of the EU and representatives of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of Iran, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon, and in the coming days with Turkey and Qatar.
Mogherini proposed the initiative on the future of Syria to EU leaders at the end of last year, who invited her to build on it. She already held a first round of talks with the Foreign Ministers of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Emirates, Turkey, Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, Qatar before the end of the year.
Besides identifying common ground on post-conflict arrangements, the initiative is examining the scope for reconciliation and reconstruction once a credible political transition is firmly under way. It is being conducted in full coordination and support of the intra-Syrian talks that will be held by the UN Special Envoy de Mistura in Geneva in February, and in view of the Brussels Conference on Syria and the region which will be hosted by the EU later in the spring.The EU is strongly committed to contribute towards a political transition in Syria as agreed in the UN Security Council Resolutions 2254 and 2118.

ENTITIES:
This week: Temporal, Syria: Location, High Representative Federica Mogherini: Person, Representative Federica Mogherini’s: Person, the country: Location, European Union: Organisation, Ministers of Foreign Affairs: Organisation, Foreign Affairs: Organisation, Iran: Location, Iran: Organisation, Saudi Arabia: Location, Saudi Arabia: Organisation, United Arab Emirates: Location, United Arab Emirates: Organisation, Egypt: Location, Egypt: Organisation, Jordan: Location, Jordan: Organisation, Lebanon: Location, Lebanon: Organisation, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, Qatar: Location, Qatar: Organisation, senior officials of the EU: Organisation, Mogherini: Person, her: Person, Syria: Location, EU leaders: Organisation, the end of last year: Temporal, She: Person, Turkey: Location, Lebanon: Location, Egypt: Location, Jordan: Location, Qatar: Location, the end of the year: Temporal, the Foreign Ministers of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Emirates, Turkey, Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, Qatar: Organisation, Foreign Ministers: Organisation, Iran: Location, Saudi Arabia: Location, the UN Special Envoy de Mistura: Person, UN Special Envoy de Mistura: Organisation, Geneva: Location, Geneva: Person, February: Temporal, Brussels: Location, Syria: Location, the region: Location, the EU: Organisation, The EU: Organisation, Syria: Location, the UN Security Council Resolutions 2254 and 2118: DocumentReference, UN Security Council: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: 09FF200CBB76594D688F8EB565717543
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East, Tobias Ellwood, responds to the attack in the Karrada district of Baghdad

Foreign Office Minister, Tobias Ellwood, said:

The attack was a horrific act of terror against innocent people in the early hours of Sunday morning in Karrada, Baghdad. I offer my sincere condolences to the families and friends of the victims, and hope those injured in the attack recover quickly.

Daesh targeted families out shopping for Eid and those celebrating suhur. It violated the peace of Ramadan. The UK stands by Iraq to defeat Daesh and end this violence.
ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East: Person, Foreign Office Minister: Person, Tobias Ellwood: Person, Middle East: Location, early hours of Sunday: Temporal, Karrada: Location, Baghdad: Location, Tobias Ellwood: Person, the Karrada district of Baghdad: Location, Baghdad: Location, I: Person, hope: Person, Daesh: Organisation, families: Organisation, Ramadan: Temporal, The UK: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, Daesh: Organisation, UK: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 1101048768E50FA1F8DA3F7B7CD105AB
TEXT:
Ministers discussed the Syria crisis and conflict in Ukraine
Boris Johnson
A Foreign Office spokesman said: “The Foreign Secretary met Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov earlier today on the margins of the UNGA meeting in New York, their first face-to-face meeting since Boris Johnson was appointed.

“The ministers discussed the crisis in Syria and the increase in violence in recent days, including the recent unacceptable attack on an aid convoy. The Foreign Secretary pressed for Russia to use its influence constructively and underlined the need for the international community to work together to resolve the conflict.

“Mr Johnson also raised the situation in Ukraine, where there are continued violations of the Minsk agreements, and stressed the need for a sustainable ceasefire in Eastern Ukraine.

“The Foreign Secretary was clear that while ongoing disagreements mean it is too early to normalise diplomatic relations, it is right that both countries continue to discuss important global issues.”
ENTITIES:
Ministers: Organisation, The Foreign Secretary: Person, Russian: Nationality, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov: Person, Sergei Lavrov: Person, UNGA: Organisation, New York: Location, New York: Organisation, Syria: Location, Boris Johnson: Person, Ukraine: Location, Boris Johnson A Foreign Office spokesman: Person, Boris Johnson: Person, Johnson A: Person, Foreign Office: Organisation, The ministers: Organisation, Syria: Location, recent days: Temporal, The Foreign Secretary: Person, the international community: Organisation, Russia: Location, Russia: Organisation, Foreign: Organisation, Mr Johnson: Person, Eastern Ukraine: Location, Eastern Ukraine: Organisation, Ukraine: Location, Ukraine: Location, Ukraine: Organisation, the Minsk agreements: DocumentReference, The Foreign Secretary: Person, both countries: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 1563238E6CF89746FDD44909F11EE319
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood calls ISIL presence in Palmyra a tragedy
Commenting on reports that ISIL forces have reached the UNESCO World Heritage Site at Palmyra in Syria, Foreign Office Minister Tobias Ellwood said:

ISIL’s presence in the ancient site of Palmyra is a tragedy for all Syrians and its destruction would be a terrible act of vandalism. This is part of a much wider human catastrophe: hundreds of thousands of Syrians have been killed at the hands of Assad and ISIL, millions have been displaced and historic cities such as Aleppo have been reduced to rubble by regime bombardment.

The UK is working with its allies to support the moderate Syrian Opposition to defend the Syrian people from Assad’s inhumanity and ISIL’s savagery.
ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood: Person, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL forces: Organisation, the UNESCO World Heritage Site at Palmyra: Location, UNESCO World Heritage Site: Organisation, Middle East: Location, Syria: Location, Foreign Office Minister Tobias Ellwood: Person, Tobias Ellwood: Person, ISIL: Organisation, the ancient site of Palmyra: Location, st Tobias: Vehicle, Tobias Ellwood: Person, all Syrians: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Palmyra: Location, Assad: Person, ISIL: Organisation, millions: Quantity, Aleppo: Location, regime: Organisation, bombardment: Weapon, hundreds of thousands: Quantity, Syrians: Organisation, The UK: Organisation, Assad: Person, ISIL: Organisation, its allies: Organisation, UK: Location, the moderate Syrian Opposition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, the Syrian people: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: 1718A3656CA87E3826A28BC3D041F024
TEXT:
Philip Hammond condemns apparent barrel bomb attacks in Syria which have killed and injured more innocent civilians

The Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said:

I am appalled by this latest brutal attack by Assad’s regime, just over a week after video footage emerged showing Syrian regime aircrew dropping barrel bombs out of helicopters.

This is further shocking proof of the horrific and indiscriminate methods the Assad regime is using to kill and injure innocent civilians, including children.

Our position remains as strong as ever – we will continue to call for a political transition to a future in which Assad has no part.
ENTITIES:
Philip Hammond: Person, The Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond: Person, Philip Hammond: Person, I: Person, Assad: Person, Assad’s regime: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian regime aircrew: Organisation, barrel bombs: Weapon, helicopters: MilitaryPlatform, barrel bomb: Weapon, Syria: Location, civilians: Organisation, children: Organisation, the Assad regime: Organisation, Assad: Person, Assad: Person, we: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 189862CF0AC0BBFA012D27D85CE90BE7
TEXT:
Foreign Secretary statement on UN chemical weapons report

The Foreign Secretary, Boris Johnson, said:

This independent investigation has concluded that the Asad regime has used chemical weapons against the Syrian people on at least three occasions, and that Daesh has used such weapons at least once. The attacks in Qamenas, Sarmin and Talamenes demonstrate the cruel barbarity of the Asad regime in this conflict. The use of chemical weapons by Daesh in Marea shows their complete disregard for human rights, and international norms and values. This report makes clear that the Asad regime has consistently failed to co-operate with the investigation.

The use of chemical weapons is horrific, and a breach of international law and UN Security Council resolutions. It is crucial to hold those responsible to account.

The regime and its backers, notably Russia, are inflicting the worst bombardment seen yet on Aleppo and other towns and areas in Syria, causing severe humanitarian suffering. We are seeing heartbreaking scenes. The UK will continue to work with the international community to pursue an end to the regime’s indiscriminate bombing campaign, full and sustained humanitarian access, an immediate and lasting ceasefire, and a return to the negotiating table.
ENTITIES:
Foreign Secretary: Person, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, chemical weapons: Weapon, the Syrian people : Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, at least three occasions: Quantity, Daesh: Organisation, such weapons: Weapon, at least once: Quantity, UN: Organisation, The Foreign Secretary: Person, Boris Johnson: Person, Qamenas: Location, Sarmin: Location, Talamenes: Location, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, chemical weapons: Weapon, Daesh: Organisation, Marea: Location, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, chemical weapons: Weapon, UN Security Council resolutions: DocumentReference, UN Security Council: Organisation, The regime: Organisation, other towns and areas: Location, Syria: Location, its backers: Organisation, Russia: Location, Russia: Organisation, bombardment: Weapon, Aleppo: Location, We: Organisation, The UK: Organisation, bombing camp: Location, the international community: Organisation, UK: Location, the regime: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 208C0A8E536C75AB9D151D7030276BE9
TEXT:
The UN Security Council voted unanimously to adopt Resolution 2249, which condemned the 13 November attacks in Paris and others in the Middle East, including those in Sousse on 25 June in which 30 Britons were murdered.

Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said:

The horrific attacks in Paris have stiffened the resolve of the international community in its determination to defeat ISIL, whose acts of terror in Europe and the Middle East aim to challenge our basic values and way of life.

The United Nations Security Council has demonstrated the unity of the international community in working to defeat ISIL. We must all act by continuing to cut off its finance, severing its access to oil and stemming the flow of foreign fighters, in addition to the military action we are taking against this evil ideology. ISIL’s murderous violence requires a strong security response. That is why the UK is working as part of the Global Coalition to degrade and defeat ISIL in Syria and Iraq and, when necessary, striking against those who pose a threat to the UK, and our people and interests.
ENTITIES:
The UN Security Council: Organisation, Paris: Location, the Middle East: Location, Middle East: Location, Sousse: Location, 25 June: Temporal, June: Person, 30 Britons: Organisation, UN Security Council: Organisation, Resolution 2249: DocumentReference, 13 November: Temporal, Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond: Person, the international community: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Philip Hammond: Person, Europe: Location, the Middle East: Location, Middle East: Location, Paris: Location, The United Nations Security Council: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, United Nations Security Council: Organisation, the international community: Organisation, We: Organisation, foreign fighters: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the UK: Organisation, UK: Location, the UK: Organisation, UK: Location, the Global Coalition: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 32AACD4CCB88ACB2C0FAB156E7BDCC2F
TEXT:
The UN have confirmed reports that ISIL has killed 70 members of the Al bu Nimr tribe in Anbar, Iraq.

Minister for the Middle East, Tobias Ellwood said:

I am deeply concerned and shocked by reports that ISIL has killed 70 members of the Al Bu Nimr tribe in Anbar province, Iraq.

We have been clear, defeating ISIL will take time and patience but it is a fight we must win. They falsely use the name of Islam to commit atrocities and have once again slaughtered Sunnis, those they claim to be defending.

Over the last year the Global Coalition has launched almost 8,000 strikes against ISIL in Iraq and Syria and have taken back 30% of territory ISIL once controlled in Iraq. United, we continue to work to defeat ISIL on all fronts: not just militarily, but cutting off their finance, reducing the influx of fighters, challenging the ideology and providing humanitarian assistance to those in need.
ENTITIES:
The UN: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, UN: Organisation, 70: Quantity, members of the Al bu Nimr tribe: Organisation, Anbar, Iraq: Location, Anbar: Location, Iraq: Location, Minister for the Middle East: Person, ISIL: Organisation, 70: Quantity, members: Organisation, the Al Bu Nimr tribe: Organisation, Anbar: Location, Anbar province: Location, Middle East: Location, Iraq: Location, Tobias Ellwood: Person, I: Person, We: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, patience: Person, we: Organisation, They: Organisation, they: Organisation, Islam: Nationality, Sunnis: Organisation, 30% of territory: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the Global Coalition: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, the last year: Temporal, 8,000: Quantity, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, fighters: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, we: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 33A216AD3A006BFF03390675E6C56594
TEXT:
FCO Minister Tobias Ellwood welcomes new budget deal as first step towards negotiating a solution to the issue of federal budget allocations

Tobias Ellwood, Foreign Office Minister for the Middle East, said:

I welcome the agreement reached yesterday between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government on the issue of federal budget allocations.

Whilst this is an interim deal, it is a positive and welcome first step which demonstrates that both parties are ready and willing to negotiate seriously and in good faith. I encourage the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government to now work together to find a long-term, comprehensive and constitutional solution to this issue. This will require flexibility and compromise on both sides; however I have no doubt that a resolution will bring benefits to Iraqis across the country.

ISIL is a threat to all Iraqis and it is important that Iraq’s communities unite in the face of this common enemy. I hope that yesterday’s agreement can contribute positively to this process.
ENTITIES:
FCO Minister Tobias Ellwood: Person, Tobias Ellwood: Person, Tobias Ellwood: Person, Tobias Ellwood, Foreign Office Minister for the Middle East: Person, Middle East: Location, I: Person, yesterday: Temporal, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the Kurdistan Regional Government: Organisation, Kurdistan Regional Government: Organisation, faith: Person, both parties: Organisation, I: Person, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the Kurdistan Regional Government: Organisation, Kurdistan Regional Government: Organisation, Iraqis: Location, Iraqis: Organisation, the country: Location, I: Person, ISIL: Organisation, Iraqis: Organisation, Iraq: Location, I: Person, yesterday: Temporal, hope: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 3A7EC63500380D5B35C211D4FF5E20EA
TEXT:
Minister Tobias Ellwood welcomes the Government of Iraq’s liberation of Tikrit and reiterates UK support for Iraq in the fight against ISIL.

Speaking today, Minister Ellwood said:

I welcome the news that the Government of Iraq has raised the Iraqi flag again in Tikrit. The UK is committed to supporting the Iraqi government against the terrorism of the vile organisation ISIL. However whilst this is a critical achievement it is a first step in a long campaign.

We are proud that the international coalition has supported the Iraqi Security Forces in its efforts to defeat ISIL and despite their propaganda machine, ISIL are losing this fight. I echo Prime Minister Abadi’s recent call that all parties respect the human rights of citizens in Tikrit who have already suffered so much at the hands of brutal ISIL terrorists.
ENTITIES:
Minister Tobias Ellwood: Person, Iraq: Location, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Tikrit: Location, Tobias Ellwood: Person, UK: Location, UK: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Tikrit: Location, Minister Ellwood: Person, Ellwood: Person, I: Person, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, today: Temporal, The UK: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the Iraqi government: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, UK: Location, long camp: Location, We: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the international coalition: Organisation, the Iraqi Security Forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, I: Person, ISIL: Organisation, Prime Minister Abadi: Person, Prime Minister Abadi’s: Person, citizens: Organisation, Tikrit: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 6CB38F21A7E71AD4FD0044E4FCE78F52
TEXT:
The Foreign Secretary joined the US Secretary of State and international partners for talks on the humanitarian situation in Aleppo and across Syria.

The Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson joined US Secretary of State John Kerry and international partners in Paris on 10 December for talks on the humanitarian situation in Aleppo and across Syria, and efforts to renew the political process to find a solution to the conflict.

Following the meeting the Foreign Secretary said:

The situation in Aleppo remains dire with desperate images of destruction and a flagrant disregard for human life being splashed across the media on a daily basis.

We agreed our first priority must be the protection of civilians and ensuring access for humanitarian aid. It’s essential that the regime and its backers provide the United Nations that access with immediate effect.

Although the deterioration of the situation in Aleppo will be a setback for the Syrian opposition it will not change the fundamentals of the conflict. There can be no military solution in Syria. We must keep pushing for a return to a political process with the credibility necessary for all parties to commit to an end to all the fighting.

Following the meeting in Paris the Foreign Secretary will return to the Gulf, visiting Saudi Arabia on 11 December.
ENTITIES:
The Foreign Secretary: Person, Aleppo: Location, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, the US Secretary of State: Person, US Secretary: Organisation, international partners: Organisation, The Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson: Person, Paris: Location, 10 December: Temporal, Aleppo: Location, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, Boris Johnson: Person, Foreign: Organisation, US Secretary: Organisation, US Secretary of State John Kerry: Person, John Kerry: Person, international partners: Organisation, the Foreign Secretary: Person, Foreign: Organisation, Aleppo: Location, We: Organisation, civilians: Organisation, the regime: Organisation, the United Nations: Organisation, United Nations: Organisation, Aleppo: Location, the Syrian opposition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syria: Location, We: Organisation, all parties: Organisation, 11 December: Temporal, Paris: Location, the Foreign Secretary: Person, Foreign: Organisation, the Gulf: Location, Saudi Arabia: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 7064D852A8BF7FB8126978D3AC40E4FC
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood comments on reports of violations of the ceasefire in Syria announced by Russia and Turkey on 29 December.

Minister Ellwood said:

We are concerned by reports of ceasefire violations and call on all parties to respect the ceasefire, particularly around the Wadi Barada area of Damascus, where civilians are facing ongoing shelling and airstrikes by the Asad regime and militias like Hezbollah. More than five million people across Damascus also remain without access to the central water supply.

It is vital that all guarantors of the ceasefire use their influence to ensure it is adhered to, and that all parties take greater steps to ensure humanitarian aid reaches all those in need across Syria.
ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood: Person, Russia: Location, Russia: Organisation, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, 29 December: Temporal, Middle East: Location, st Tobias: Vehicle, Tobias Ellwood: Person, Syria: Location, Minister Ellwood: Person, the Wadi Barada area: Location, Damascus: Location, We: Organisation, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, militias like Hezbollah: Organisation, Hezbollah: Organisation, Ellwood: Person, five million: Quantity, people: Organisation, ss Damascus: Vehicle, Damascus: Location, all parties: Organisation, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, guarantors of the ceasefire: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 7148F3D092DA3E560332528D7167DF0F
TEXT:
Philip Hammond welcomes agreement between Iraqi and Kurdistan Regional governments on oil exports and revenue sharing.

The Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said:

I very much welcome the agreement on 2 December between the Federal Government of Iraq, led by Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, and the Kurdistan Regional Government, represented by Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani, on detailed arrangements on oil exports and revenue sharing.

Iraq faces significant challenges and all communities must cooperate to defeat ISIL militarily, assist the displaced and provide an inclusive future for the country. I welcome the important steps that have been taken by Prime Minister Abadi and his government in recent weeks in support of this, including today’s announcement. I congratulate all concerned for their work to resolve this long-standing disagreement. The UK has supported these efforts at dialogue throughout.

I hope that all Iraqi leaders will follow this constructive approach to addressing practical challenges, in the interests of national reconciliation and unity against a common enemy who are a threat to all.
ENTITIES:
Philip Hammond: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi: Organisation, Kurdistan Regional: Organisation, Kurdistan Regional governments: Organisation, the Federal Government of Iraq: Organisation, Federal Government: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi: Person, the Kurdistan Regional Government: Organisation, Kurdistan Regional Government: Organisation, Philip Hammond: Person, Prime Minister Nechirvan Barzani: Person, I: Person, 2 December: Temporal, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, the country: Organisation, all communities: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, I: Person, today’s announcement: DocumentReference, Prime Minister Abadi: Person, his government: Organisation, I: Person, The UK: Organisation, UK: Location, I: Person, all Iraqi leaders: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, a common enemy: Organisation, hope: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 74E7DCD5876B4EF1E95448F0E0C073CD
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood marks one year since Yazidi plight on Mount Sinjar at the hands of ISIL.

Speaking today Mr Ellwood said:

A year ago, the UK’s brave Armed Forces and aid workers played a crucial role in getting vital supplies to innocent civilians suffering at the hands of ISIL. The Yazidi community were exposed, starving and dying of thirst when they were forced up Mount Sinjar after fleeing from their homes. The UK Government conducted seven airdrops of life-saving humanitarian aid.

We will continue to protect all those persecuted by these brutal terrorists as part of a 63 nation coalition designed to defeat ISIL’s poisonous ideology.

We acknowledge that we need to do more in the fight against violent Islamist extremism. Be in no doubt, we are committed to destroying the terrorist scourge of ISIL that threatens the lives of people from all communities in both Iraq and Syria. Defeating ISIL will take time and patience but it is a fight we must win.
ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East: Person, ISIL: Organisation, Middle East: Location, st Tobias: Vehicle, Tobias Ellwood: Person, one year: Temporal, Yazidi: Nationality, Mount Sinjar: Location, Sinjar: Location, Mr Ellwood: Person, ISIL: Organisation, A year ago: Temporal, the UK’s brave Armed Forces: Organisation, UK: Location, UK’s brave Armed Forces: Organisation, Armed Forces: Organisation, aid workers: Organisation, The Yazidi community: Organisation, their homes: Location, Yazidi: Nationality, Mount Sinjar: Location, The UK Government: Organisation, seven: Quantity, UK Government: Organisation, We: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, these brutal terrorists: Organisation, a 63 nation coalition: Organisation, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, Islamist: Nationality, people from all communities in both Iraq and Syria: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, we: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, patience: Person, we: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 78C6FA20C3559F23A36974F2B22BC73A
TEXT:
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson statement on the UN not being given access to eastern Aleppo.
On Monday 19 December the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 2328. The Resolution demanded full access for the UN across Syria and requested it to monitor the evacuations from eastern Aleppo and to ensure that protection is provided to those who opted to remain.
The UN updated Security Council members today (23 December) that it has still not been given access to eastern Aleppo.
Following the update, the Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson said:
“It is unacceptable that the UN has still not been given access to eastern Aleppo to assist those who remain and carry out monitoring. The regime and those who back it must immediately deliver on their obligations and comply with Security Council Resolution 2328 to ensure that civilians are protected.
“The Syrian army now claims full control of Aleppo, but this is a hollow victory. Assad has been utterly dependent on foreign militias and Russian air support, and has caused destruction on a tragic scale including further atrocities against the Syrian people. Assad’s brutal regime can never unite Syria and bring stability.
“There is only one way to end this conflict: a Syrian-led political settlement based on a transition away from the Assad regime. The international community – including Russia and Iran – must now work to support a nationwide Cessation of Hostilities to help create the environment for a political settlement based on genuine transition.”
ENTITIES:
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson: Person, Boris Johnson: Person, the UN: Organisation, UN: Organisation, eastern Aleppo: Location, Aleppo: Location, the UN Security Council: Organisation, UN Security Council: Organisation, Monday 19 December: Temporal, Resolution 2328: DocumentReference, The international community: Organisation, Russia: Location, Russia: Organisation, Iran: Location, Iran: Organisation, The Resolution: DocumentReference, eastern Aleppo: Location, Aleppo: Location, those who opted to remain: Organisation, the UN: Organisation, UN: Organisation, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, The UN: Organisation, eastern Aleppo: Location, Aleppo: Location, Security Council: Organisation, Security Council members: Organisation, UN: Organisation, today: Temporal, 23 December: Temporal, it: Organisation, eastern Aleppo: Location, Aleppo: Location, carry: Person, the Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson: Person, Foreign: Organisation, Boris Johnson: Person, the UN: Organisation, UN: Organisation, The regime: Organisation, civilians: Organisation, Security Council: Organisation, Security Council Resolution 2328: DocumentReference, The Syrian army: Organisation, Aleppo: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Assad: Person, Syrian: Nationality, people: Organisation, foreign militias: Organisation, Russian: Nationality, Russian air support: Organisation, Assad’s brutal regime: Organisation, Assad: Person, Syria: Location, the Assad regime: Organisation, Assad: Person, Syrian: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: 821F5BBD9F50DD7301C12ECCC926B00C
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood comments following an attack on a petrol station and restaurant in al-Hilla in Iraq 
Minister Tobias Ellwood said:
I utterly condemn the shocking attack on a petrol station and restaurant at al-Hilla earlier today, for which Daesh has claimed responsibility. The UK continues to stand shoulder to shoulder with the government and people of Iraq in the fight against terrorism. Such an attack shows the desperation of Daesh as they see their so-called caliphate crumble around them.
My thoughts are with the family and friends of those who have been killed and injured in such a horrific act.

ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood: Person, al-Hilla: Location, Hilla: Location, Iraq: Location, Minister Tobias Ellwood: Person, Tobias Ellwood: Person, I: Person, Middle East: Location, a petrol station: Location, restaurant: Location, al-Hilla: Location, Hilla: Location, st Tobias: Vehicle, Daesh: Organisation, Tobias Ellwood: Person, a petrol station: Location, restaurant: Location, The UK: Organisation, UK: Location, the government: Organisation, people of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Daesh: Organisation, My: Person, the family: Organisation, the family and friends: Organisation, those who have been killed and injured: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 85F0CF36CAEE839799563350B30B96B1
TEXT:
Boris Johnson met the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Ibrahim al- Jaafari in London today.
A Foreign Office spokesman said:
“The Foreign Secretary met the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, to discuss a range of issues including the ongoing fight and the progress being made against Daesh in Iraq. They also discussed military, humanitarian and stabilisation planning for forthcoming operations to free the city of Mosul.
“The Foreign Secretary underlined the UK’s commitment to supporting the government of Iraq to defeat terrorism and to give all Iraqis new hope for the future. They also agreed to work together with international partners and at the UN on a global campaign to bring Daesh to justice.”
ENTITIES:
Boris Johnson: Person, the Iraqi Foreign Minister: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Ibrahim: Person, Ibrahim al- Jaafari: Person, London: Location, today: Temporal, A Foreign Office spokesman: Person, st Daesh: Vehicle, Foreign Office: Organisation, Daesh: Organisation, Iraq: Location, The Foreign Secretary: Person, the Iraqi Foreign Minister: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Ibrahim al-Jaafari: Person, They: Organisation, the city: Location, the city of Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, for fort: Location, The Foreign Secretary: Person, Iraqis: Organisation, hope: Person, the UK: Organisation, UK: Location, the government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, They: Organisation, Daesh: Location, Daesh: Organisation, international partners: Organisation, the UN: Organisation, UN: Organisation, global camp: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 8A716D1B7D81B723DFD8361BAEA100DC
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood has commented on the long-overdue delivery of aid to civilians in Madaya.

Foreign Office Minister Tobias Ellwood said:

I am deeply relieved by the delivery of life-saving food and aid supplies to Madaya. Although long overdue, these supplies will help relieve the suffering of 40,000 civilians besieged within the city.

The UN Security Council is clear that the use of starvation of civilians as a method of combat, including the besiegement of populated areas, is unacceptable. But last year just 10 per cent of UN convoy requests to besieged areas were approved by the Asad regime. The International Community must do all it can to pressure the Asad regime to lift sieges in place across Syria and sustain humanitarian access.

The UK is at the forefront of global efforts to provide humanitarian aid having committed over £1.1bn to vulnerable and displaced people inside Syria and to refugees in neighbouring countries. In February we will bring together world leaders in London to identify long-term solutions to help address the needs of those affected by the crisis.
ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood: Person, Madaya: Location, Middle East: Location, st Tobias: Vehicle, Tobias Ellwood: Person, civilians: Organisation, Foreign Office Minister Tobias Ellwood: Person, Madaya: Location, Tobias Ellwood: Person, the city: Location, 40,000 civilians: Organisation, The UN Security Council: Organisation, populated areas: Location, UN Security Council: Organisation, 10 per cent: Quantity, UN: Organisation, last year: Temporal, besieged areas: Location, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, The International Community: Organisation, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, International Community: Organisation, it: Organisation, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, The UK: Organisation, Syria: Location, refugees: Organisation, neighbouring countries: Location, UK: Location, £1.1bn: Money, February: Temporal, world leaders: Organisation, London: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 8B3BA274503F6D30F7E80C41E7568744
TEXT:
The Prime Minister and President Hollande discussed UK-France co-operation on counter-terrorism, migration, defence and nuclear energy.
Prime Minister and President Hollande speaking at the UK-France Summit 2016.
The Prime Minister and President Hollande met on 3 March for the 2016 UK-France Summit at Amiens in France. The Summit is the first since last year’s terror attacks in Paris and the 2 leaders discussed the fight against terrorism through intensified police and security co-operation.

The Foreign, Home and Defence Secretaries also attended, meeting their French counterparts to discuss with topics including counter-terrorism, the migration crisis, Syria and Libya.

UK-France relationship
France is one of our most important partners and this summit was an opportunity to further strengthen the co-operation between our 2 countries. Membership of the European Union also gives both countries greater security and greater capacity to project power.
During the summit, ministers made the following announcements:

Defence Secretary secures progress on Brimstone sales as unmanned aircraft project moves forward
further joint action between UK and France in Calais region
Read the summit documents on issues including counter-terrorism, migration, defence and nuclear energy.
ENTITIES:
The Prime Minister: Person, President Hollande: Person, UK: Location, UK: Organisation, France: Location, France: Organisation, Prime Minister: Person, President Hollande: Person, the UK: Organisation, UK: Location, France: Location, France: Organisation, 2016: Temporal, The Prime Minister: Person, France: Location, President Hollande: Person, 3 March: Temporal, 2016: Temporal, UK: Location, UK-France Summit: Organisation, France: Location, Summit: Location, Amiens: Location, The Summit: Location, last year: Temporal, Summit: Location, Paris: Location, the 2 leaders: Organisation, The Foreign, Home and Defence Secretaries: Organisation, Syria: Location, Libya: Location, their French counterparts: Organisation, French: Nationality, UK: Location, UK: Organisation, France: Location, France: Organisation, France: Location, France: Organisation, partners: Organisation, the European Union: Organisation, European Union: Organisation, both countries: Organisation, Brimstone: Weapon, unmanned aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, ministers: Organisation, UK: Location, UK: Organisation, France: Location, France: Organisation, Calais: Location, Calais region: Location, Defence Secretary: Person, the summit: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: AB37B1171B0A38B24A6B74B18903E8D5
TEXT:
The UN commission of Inquiry on Syria has today published a report on the human rights situation in Syria.

Responding to the report Gareth Bayley, the UK Special Representative for Syria said:

The report by the UN Independent Commission of Inquiry (CoI) on Syria makes grim reading: it details deliberate attacks against civilians, and unabated violations of human rights such as torture, illegal detentions, executions and sexual violence. It documents the breadth of barbarity carried out by the Asad regime against its own people, with deliberate targeting of civilian infrastructure such as hospitals, schools and markets. The report also details the destruction of Syria’s cultural heritage by Daesh. Syria is being ripped apart by this widespread destruction, the fuelling of sectarian divisions, and the slaughter and scattering of its communities.

The COI must be allowed to continue gathering evidence so that one day Asad and other perpetrators of human rights abuses and possible war crimes can be held to account. There can be no lasting peace without justice; there must be no impunity.

The full report can be found on the Human Rights Council web page dedicated to the commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
ENTITIES:
The UN commission of Inquiry on Syria: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, UN: Organisation, today: Temporal, a report on the human rights situation in Syria: DocumentReference, UN Independent Commission: Organisation, Syria: Location, Gareth Bayley: Person, the UK Special Representative for Syria: Person, UK Special Representative: Organisation, Syria: Location, The report by the UN Independent Commission of Inquiry (CoI) on Syria: DocumentReference, It: DocumentReference, hospitals: Location, schools: Location, markets: Location, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, people: Organisation, The report: DocumentReference, Syria: Location, Daesh: Organisation, Syria: Location, its communities: Organisation, The COI: Organisation, Asad: Person, other perpetrators of human rights abuses: Organisation, other perpetrators: Organisation, The full report: DocumentReference, the Syrian Arab Republic: Organisation, Syrian Arab Republic: Location, the Human Rights Council: Organisation, Human Rights Council: Organisation, page: Person, 

DOCUMENT: C35F45FE7CBA87AE07646066842C91E0
TEXT:
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson welcomes the UN Board of Inquiry’s summary of its investigation into the attack on an aid convoy, which took place in Urem al-Kubra, northern Syria, on 19 September.

The Foreign Secretary said:

I welcome the Board of Inquiry’s report, which found that the aid convoy was attacked from the air, making it clear that the strike was carried out by forces of either the Asad regime or Russia.

This was one of the most appalling incidents of the conflict so far. Whether deliberate or accidental, this was an indefensible attack, with at least ten people killed and vital aid to vulnerable people destroyed.

Over half a million Syrians are still in areas besieged by the regime – many have received no aid since June. The regime and its backers must comply with their obligations, including the recently adopted UN Security Council Resolution 2328, to allow the UN unconditional, safe and unhindered access across Syria.
ENTITIES:
Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson: Person, an aid convoy: Organisation, Urem al-Kubra, northern Syria: Location, Syria: Location, Boris Johnson: Person, 19 September: Temporal, UN Board of Inquiry: Organisation, UN Board of Inquiry’s: Organisation, UN Board of Inquiry’s summary of its investigation: DocumentReference, The Foreign Secretary: Person, Asad: Person, Asad regime: Organisation, Russia: Location, Russia: Organisation, I: Person, the Board of Inquiry: Organisation, the Board of Inquiry’s report: DocumentReference, Board of Inquiry’s: Organisation, the aid convoy: Organisation, vulnerable people: Organisation, ten: Quantity, people: Organisation, Over half a million: Quantity, June: Person, June: Temporal, Syrians: Organisation, the regime: Organisation, The regime: Organisation, UN: Organisation, its backers: Organisation, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, UN Security Council: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: C3BB2D0EE548765402C961463415E4CA
TEXT:
Philip Hammond welcomes UNSC support for new talks to end Syrian conflict.

Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond welcomed the unanimous adoption of UN Security Council Resolution 2254 as an important step towards bringing the warring parties in Syria to the negotiating table and to a transition away from the Assad regime to an inclusive Syrian government.

Mr Hammond said:

Syria has for too long been the world’s biggest humanitarian and security crisis. The international community has now come together to work to end the bloody civil war in Syria and has paved the way for talks amongst the Syrian parties that will see a transition away from the murderous regime of Assad. This resolution gives us a timetable and a clear way forward. Of course there are many challenges ahead but the world has taken a great step forward to resolving the Syrian crisis.
ENTITIES:
Philip Hammond: Person, UNSC: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond: Person, Syria: Location, Philip Hammond: Person, the Assad regime: Organisation, Assad: Person, Syrian government: Organisation, UN Security Council Resolution 2254: DocumentReference, UN Security Council: Organisation, Mr Hammond: Person, Syria: Location, The international community: Organisation, the Syrian parties: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, regime of Assad: Organisation, Assad: Person, Syria: Location, us: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: C66A9E77E1142C3F0909657DDDD475A5
TEXT:
Tobias Ellwood, Minister for the Middle East welcomes the liberation of Sinjar and reiterates support for the Government of Iraq in the fight against ISIL

Minister Ellwood said:

This is a significant day; Sinjar has been liberated after its violent and unwanted occupation by the terrorist group ISIL. I commend Kurdish and Yezidi fighters for their determined and sustained efforts to reclaim the town. For ISIL, this means yet another military defeat in Iraq. They have now lost more than 30 percent of the territory they once held there.

The Coalition’s strategy to defeat ISIL is succeeding. Sinjar is free because Royal Air Force and other Coalition forces provided vital air support for local, legitimate ground forces, focused on defeating ISIL and minimising civilian casualties. The UK remains steadfast in its support of the Government of Iraq and the Iraqi people in their fight against ISIL.
ENTITIES:
Tobias Ellwood: Person, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Minister Ellwood: Person, Minister for the Middle East: Person, Ellwood: Person, Sinjar: Location, the terrorist group ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Middle East: Location, Sinjar: Location, I: Person, Kurdish: Nationality, Kurdish and Yezidi fighters: Organisation, the town: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Iraq: Location, They: Organisation, 30 percent: Quantity, the territory: Location, they: Organisation, The Coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Sinjar: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Royal Air Force: Organisation, other Coalition forces: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, local, legitimate ground forces: Organisation, The UK: Organisation, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, UK: Location, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the Iraqi people: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: CBD73D24324D3C3A3A76AC430E05A069
TEXT:
Foreign Secretary welcomes new Syria sanctions listings that apply further pressure on Assad’s brutal regime.

Philip Hammond said: The UK has worked tirelessly with other member states to secure 13 new EU sanctions listings on Syria. We are targeting developers, proliferators and users of chemical weapons, along with businessmen and companies supporting the brutal shabiha militias. We have also agreed to target individuals supplying oil to the regime, including George Haswani, a middleman buying oil from ISIL on behalf of the regime. This listing gives yet another indication that Assad’s “war” on ISIL is a sham and that he supports them financially.

These sanctions show that EU is united in its condemnation of Assad’s brutal policies. We will continue applying pressure to the regime until it reassesses its position, ends the violence and engages in meaningful negotiations with the moderate opposition.
ENTITIES:
Foreign Secretary: Person, Syria: Location, Syria: Organisation, Assad’s brutal regime: Organisation, Assad: Person, Philip Hammond: Person, Syria: Location, The UK: Organisation, UK: Location, member states: Organisation, 13: Quantity, EU: Organisation, We: Organisation, companies: Organisation, shabiha militias: Organisation, developers, proliferators and users: Organisation, chemical weapons: Weapon, businessmen: Organisation, We: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the regime: Organisation, George Haswani: Person, Assad: Person, ISIL: Organisation, he: Person, EU: Organisation, Assad: Person, We: Organisation, the regime: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: D23AD6D80730BEF27D23CDD2287AC200
TEXT:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood comments on the start of the Iraqi mission to recapture the city of Mosul in Iraq.
Minister Ellwood said:
The start of Iraqi operations to retake the city of Mosul marks another step forward towards clearing Daesh from Iraq. After 2 years of brutal rule, the people of Mosul can start to have hope for a better future.
This will be the greatest challenge that Iraq’s Security Forces have yet encountered – they are up to that challenge. The UK, as part of the Global Coalition, is committed to continuing to provide the government of Iraq with military, humanitarian and stabilisation support.

ENTITIES:
Minister for the Middle East Tobias Ellwood: Person, the city: Location, the city of Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, Iraq: Location, Middle East: Location, st Tobias: Vehicle, Tobias Ellwood: Person, the Iraqi mission: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Minister Ellwood: Person, Daesh: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, the city: Location, the city of Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, Ellwood: Person, the people of Mosul: Organisation, Mosul: Location, 2 years: Quantity, 2 years: Temporal, hope: Person, Iraq: Location, Iraq’s Security Forces: Organisation, they: Organisation, The UK: Organisation, the Global Coalition: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, UK: Location, the government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, 

DOCUMENT: E967805EB658EB937216A53EE9733656
TEXT:
The visit by FCO Minister Tobias Ellwood focused on support to Syria as well as regional security and prosperity.

The Minister for Central Asia, Tobias Ellwood, visited Turkey on 4 April and Uzbekistan from 5-6 April 2016.

In Turkey Minister Ellwood met with the Syrian National Coalition, as well as local Turkish and UK organisations focused on supporting refugees, and preventing sexual violence in conflict.

In his first visit to Uzbekistan as Minister for Central Asia, Mr Ellwood met a number of Ministers and senior officials and discussed a range of issues including political and security, human rights, trade and investment.

The Minister also held meetings with British businesses working in Tashkent, Uzbek alumni of British universities and students of Westminster International University in Tashkent.

Following the visit, the Minister said:

Turkey is a key player in the region dealing with the Syrian conflict. I was pleased to meet a range of organisations to learn about the important work they do.

This was my first visit to Uzbekistan and an important opportunity to deepen and strengthen bilateral relations between the UK and Uzbekistan on a number of issues important to us both.
ENTITIES:
FCO: Organisation, FCO Minister Tobias Ellwood: Person, Tobias Ellwood: Person, Syria: Location, Syria: Organisation, The Minister for Central Asia: Person, Central Asia: Location, Tobias Ellwood: Person, Turkey: Location, 4 April: Temporal, April: Person, Uzbekistan: Location, 5-6 April 2016: Temporal, Minister Ellwood: Person, refugees: Organisation, Ellwood: Person, Turkey: Location, the Syrian National Coalition: Organisation, Syrian National Coalition: Organisation, Turkish and UK organisations: Organisation, Turkish: Nationality, UK: Location, Uzbekistan: Location, Minister for Central Asia: Person, Central Asia: Location, Mr Ellwood: Person, a number of Ministers and senior officials: Organisation, The Minister: Person, students: Organisation, Westminster International University: Organisation, Tashkent: Location, British: Nationality, British businesses: Organisation, Tashkent: Location, Uzbek alumni of British universities: Organisation, British: Nationality, the Minister: Person, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, I: Person, organisations: Organisation, they: Organisation, the UK: Organisation, UK: Location, Uzbekistan: Location, Uzbekistan: Organisation, Uzbekistan: Location, my: Person, 

DOCUMENT: ED9C03D12FCA518C78DD6C3909CA5E42
TEXT:
Tobias Ellwood condemns ISIL’s treatment of residents of Mosul and reiterates the UK’s commitment to defeating this terrorist organisation.

Speaking nearly 12 months after the fall of Mosul to ISIL terrorists, Tobias Ellwood said:

Nearly 12 months since the city of Mosul in Northern Iraq was taken by ISIL terrorists, we have heard once again about the horrendous treatment of the people of Mosul.

I am appalled by reports of the murder of hundreds of people, the ill treatment of women and the recruitment of children as young as 10 as soldiers, executioners and suicide bombers.

The UK, the wider Global Coalition and the Government of Iraq are committed to defeating these terrorists and have already supported the re-taking by Iraqi security forces of over 25% of Iraqi territory, including Tikrit. We have supported the liberation of key towns in Northern Iraq including Rabiyah and Zumar, broken the siege of the Yazidis on Mount Sinjar, and pushed ISIL out of Kobane.

As the second largest contributor to the Coalition military activities, the UK has flown over 870 missions, conducted over 265 bombing raids on ISIL targets, and is now providing an additional 125 soldiers to assist in Counter-IED training for the Iraqi Army helping them to clear territory safely and return it to local people.

Last week, we also announced that we would increase our humanitarian support to Iraq by £20 million, bringing our total contribution to £59.5 million, supporting people across Iraq who have been forced to flee from ISIL’s brutality.
ENTITIES:
Tobias Ellwood: Person, terrorist organisation: Organisation, ns ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, residents of Mosul: Organisation, Mosul: Location, UK: Location, UK: Organisation, the city: Location, the city of Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, Northern: Location, Northern Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, 12 months: Quantity, 12 months: Temporal, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL terrorists: Organisation, the people of Mosul: Organisation, Mosul: Location, Mosul: Location, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL terrorists: Organisation, Tobias Ellwood: Person, 12 months: Quantity, 12 months: Temporal, I: Person, 10: Quantity, suicide bombers: Weapon, hundreds of people: Organisation, The UK: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, 25%: Quantity, 25% of Iraqi territory: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi territory: Location, Tikrit: Location, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, UK: Location, Iraq: Location, the wider Global Coalition: Organisation, these terrorists: Organisation, We: Organisation, Yazidis: Nationality, Mount Sinjar: Location, Sinjar: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Kobane: Location, Northern Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Rabiyah: Location, Zumar: Location, 265: Quantity, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL targets: Location, 125: Quantity, soldiers: Organisation, the Iraqi Army: Organisation, Iraqi Army: Organisation, local people: Organisation, the Coalition military: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, the UK: Organisation, UK: Location, 870: Quantity, Last week: Temporal, we: Organisation, £59.5 million: Money, people: Organisation, ss Iraq: Vehicle, Iraq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Iraq: Location, £20 million: Money, 

DOCUMENT: 108A8CFC05CC3139A6E65B7A4239F5C6
TEXT:
The United States strongly condemns the barbaric terrorist attacks in Iraq today, including one in Baghdad claimed by Daesh that specifically targeted mourners inside a funeral tent. We extend our deepest condolences to the victims’ families and friends. This attack is yet another sign of Daesh’s cowardice and contempt for human life and their attempt to sow sectarian discord among the people of Iraq. It only underscores the importance of Coalition efforts to support Iraqi security forces in their campaign to defeat this terrorist group. The United States remains committed to that goal.
ENTITIES:
The United States: Organisation, Daesh: Organisation, mourners: Organisation, a funeral tent: Location, United States: Location, Iraq: Location, today: Temporal, Baghdad: Location, We: Organisation, the victims’ families and friends: Organisation, the people of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Daesh: Organisation, this terrorist group: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, their camp: Location, The United States: Organisation, United States: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 1E4938BF59D806C4E3AC9DDF2CC3E87F
TEXT:
On behalf of President Obama and the American people, I congratulate the people of Turkey as you celebrate the 93rd anniversary of the founding of your republic on October 29.

As a long-time Ally, the United States remains steadfast in support of Turkey’s democratically elected government and institutions—institutions enshrined in Turkey’s constitution. And we express again our condolences to the friends and loved ones of those who were injured or who died during the coup attempt last July.

Our two countries continue to work side by side to address a range of challenges including the Syrian civil war, the global refugee crisis, and the threat posed to law-abiding people everywhere by violent extremist groups. Especially in the wake of recent terrorist attacks inside Turkey, the United States is committed to standing with you as we strive together—in partnership with others in the world community—on behalf of justice, security, and the rule of law.

The American people place a high value on their many connections to you—through trade and tourism, academic exchanges, and cultural and familial ties. As you mark this special day, you have our very best wishes for a happy, prosperous, and safe year to come.
ENTITIES:
93rd: Quantity, 93rd anniversary: Temporal, President Obama: Person, October 29: Temporal, the American people: Organisation, American: Nationality, I: Person, the people of Turkey: Organisation, Turkey: Location, Ally: Person, Turkey: Location, Turkey’s constitution: DocumentReference, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, Turkey’s democratically elected government: Organisation, Turkey: Location, last July: Temporal, st July: Vehicle, we: Organisation, Our two countries: Organisation, violent extremist groups: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, the world community: Organisation, Turkey: Location, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, The American people: Organisation, American: Nationality, their: Organisation, you: Organisation, you: Organisation, you: Organisation, our: Organisation, happy: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 1F9A1D68D16594512C9CBAD02D53E4C1
TEXT:
We welcome the positive outcome of the gathering of the Syrian opposition in Riyadh today, including reaching a consensus on principles for a pluralistic and democratic Syria and on how to advance a political settlement to end the conflict in Syria.

As I conveyed to Foreign Minister Al-Jubeir today, we appreciate Saudi Arabia’s leadership in convening this broad and representative group of 116 participants, who agreed today on the structure of their negotiating body to represent them in the political process. We appreciate that this extremely diverse group of Syrians put aside differences in the interest of building a new Syria.

With the progress made in both Vienna and now in Riyadh, the International Syria Support Group continues to build a foundation for constructive negotiations in January under UN auspices, regarding a political transition in accordance with the Geneva Communique of 2012. While this important step forward brings us closer to starting negotiations between the Syrian parties, we recognize the difficult work ahead, and remain determined to continue toward a political settlement that brings an end the conflict.
ENTITIES:
We: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syria: Location, the Syrian opposition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Riyadh: Location, group of 116 participants: Organisation, Foreign Minister Al-Jubeir: Person, today: Temporal, I: Person, Al-Jubeir: Person, today: Temporal, we: Organisation, Saudi Arabia: Location, Saudi Arabia’s leadership: Organisation, We: Organisation, Syria: Location, group of Syrians: Organisation, January: Temporal, UN: Organisation, the Geneva Communique of 2012: DocumentReference, Geneva: Person, 2012: Temporal, Vienna: Location, Riyadh: Location, the International Syria Support Group: Organisation, International Syria Support Group: Organisation, we: Organisation, us: Organisation, the Syrian parties: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, 

DOCUMENT: 204532F7EDD22A40E15407ADA16AC058
TEXT:
The U.S. Department of State's Rewards for Justice program is offering rewards for information that will disrupt the trade of oil and trafficking of antiquities that benefit the terrorist group Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The Secretary of State has authorized a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to the significant disruption of the sale and/or trade of oil and antiquities by, for, on behalf of, or to benefit ISIL, also known by its Arabic acronym as DAESH. Through its illicit oil operations and trafficking in looted archaeological material from Syria and Iraq, ISIL has generated millions of dollars in hard currency, enabling it to brutalize and oppress innocent civilians. The U.S. Department of State expects this reward offer will encourage individuals to come forward with information regarding persons or entities engaged in the production, facilitation, processing, smuggling, distribution, sale, and trade of oil and antiquities that would benefit ISIL, as well as the information on the smuggling networks, methods, and routes underlying these activities. Today’s announcement marks the first time the U.S. Secretary of State has authorized a Rewards for Justice offer for information that could be used to disrupt sale or trade in oil or antiquities by, or on behalf of, a terrorist organization. 
ENTITIES:
The U.S. Department of State's Rewards for Justice program: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, U.S. Department of State: Organisation, The Secretary of State: Person, ISIL: Organisation, ts Arabic: Vehicle, DAESH: Organisation, DAESH: Person, $5 million: Money, Iraq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, millions of dollars: Money, civilians: Organisation, Syria: Location, The U.S. Department of State: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the smuggling networks: Organisation, U.S. Department of State: Organisation, Today: Temporal, a terrorist organization: Organisation, the U.S. Secretary of State: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 2C271BB862754AECF35665280FE7B93C
TEXT:
I welcome today's news that Syrian opposition forces liberated the Syrian town of Dabiq from ISIL control, aided by strong support from our ally Turkey and our international coalition. This is more than just the latest military result against this barbaric group. Dabiq held symbolic importance to ISIL. The group carried out unspeakable atrocities in Dabiq, named its English-language magazine after the town and claimed it would be the site of a final victory for the so-called caliphate. Instead its liberation gives the campaign to deliver ISIL a lasting defeat new momentum in Syria. Again I want to congratulate the Syrians who fought to free Dabiq and thank our ally Turkey for the close coordination during this operation.‎
ENTITIES:
I: Person, ally: Person, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, our international coalition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian opposition forces: Organisation, the Syrian town of Dabiq: Location, Syrian: Nationality, ISIL: Organisation, this barbaric group: Organisation, Dabiq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, The group: Organisation, the so-called caliphate: Organisation, Dabiq: Location, its English-language magazine: DocumentReference, ts English: Vehicle, English-language: Nationality, the town: Location, the camp: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Syria: Location, the Syrians: Organisation, I: Person, Dabiq: Location, ally: Person, Turkey: Location, Turkey: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 2C6CB502FAD51B6B4CA765E57E221BEA
TEXT:
Special Presidential Envoy for the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL Brett McGurk will lead an interagency delegation to Berlin, Germany for a meeting on November 17 with key members of the Counter ISIL Coalition. This meeting will be an opportunity for Coalition partners to discuss ongoing efforts for Mosul and Raqqah and to explore ways to further accelerate the campaign against Da’esh in Iraq and Syria and its network outside those geographic borders. It will include a detailed discussion on the priorities needed to sustain the momentum of the campaign along our multiple lines of effort, including military, foreign terrorist fighters, counterterrorist financing, counter-messaging and stabilization of liberated areas.

The Coalition’s Small Group regularly meets to coordinate and enhance combined efforts to counter Da’esh. The last meeting of the Small Group took place in Washington, D.C. on July 21, 2016, at the Ministerial level.
ENTITIES:
Special Presidential Envoy for the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL Brett McGurk: Person, Berlin: Location, Berlin, Germany: Location, Germany: Location, November 17: Temporal, key members of the Counter ISIL Coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, Counter: Organisation, ISIL Brett McGurk: Organisation, Presidential Envoy: Organisation, an interagency delegation: Organisation, Raqqah: Location, the camp: Location, st Da: Vehicle, Da’esh: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Syria: Location, its network: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, Coalition partners: Organisation, Mosul: Location, foreign terrorist fighters: Organisation, liberated areas: Location, the camp: Location, The Coalition’s Small Group: Organisation, Group: Organisation, Da’esh: Organisation, the Small Group: Organisation, Small Group: Organisation, Washington: Location, Washington, D.C.: Location, July 21, 2016: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: 2E857EFC55A390B6382FDE5C87F06D67
TEXT:
The United States strongly condemns the horrific attacks today in the towns of Jabla in the northwest province of Latakia, and the port city of Tartus, for which Da’esh has claimed responsibility and where more than 60 civilians were killed and injured in multiple bombings that targeted bus stations and a hospital. We will continue to lead the global coalition to degrade and defeat Da’esh so that it can no longer brutalize those who reject its tormented worldview. This shared fight against Da’esh will be aided by Syrians reaching a negotiated political transition away from the Asad dictatorship whose actions have helped Da’esh gather support. We also call for an end to the Asad regime’s escalating attacks on Aleppo and Daraya, as well as its besiegement of towns and obstruction of humanitarian access. These actions demonstrate a disregard for the Cessation of Hostilities, UN Security Council Resolution 2254, and efforts to advance a political solution to the conflict, as well as its own commitments to facilitate full access for humanitarian relief supplies. Secretary Kerry raised these concerns in a call with Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov earlier today and urged him to press the regime to cease at once airstrikes against opposition forces and innocent civilians in Aleppo and the Damascus suburbs. Russia has a special responsibility in this regard to press the regime to end its offensive attacks and strikes that kill civilians, immediately allow relief supplies, as determined solely by the UN, to reach all in need, and to comply completely with the Cessation of Hostilities, so that political talks aimed at ending the crisis have a chance to succeed. Such a solution will allow all parties to focus on the shared threat posed by Da’esh and other terrorists.
ENTITIES:
The United States: Organisation, Latakia: Location, the port city of Tartus: Location, port city: Location, Tartus: Location, Da’esh: Organisation, 60 civilians: Organisation, bus stations: Location, a hospital: Location, United States: Location, Jabla: Location, the northwest province of Latakia: Location, We: Organisation, the global coalition: Organisation, Da’esh: Organisation, Asad: Person, Da’esh: Organisation, st Da: Vehicle, Da’esh: Organisation, Syrians: Organisation, the Asad regime: Organisation, Asad: Person, Aleppo: Location, Daraya: Location, UN Security Council Resolution 2254: DocumentReference, UN Security Council: Organisation, Secretary Kerry: Person, Kerry: Person, him: Person, the regime: Organisation, opposition forces: Organisation, innocent civilians: Organisation, Aleppo: Location, Damascus: Location, Damascus suburbs: Location, Russian: Nationality, Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov: Person, Lavrov: Person, today: Temporal, Russia: Location, Russia: Organisation, the UN: Organisation, UN: Organisation, the regime: Organisation, all parties: Organisation, Da’esh: Organisation, other terrorists: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 31E63458C6BF8F6F1D50D7041E5B89C9
TEXT:
Recent media reports have speculated on the role that international forces will play in the Iraqi operation to liberate Mosul. As we have repeatedly made clear, the United States supports Iraqi unity and sovereignty. To that end, we believe all international forces in Iraq should be there with the approval of and in coordination with the Government of Iraq, under the umbrella of the Coalition. It is imperative for all parties to coordinate closely over the coming days and weeks to ensure unity of effort in defeating Daesh and to provide for the lasting security of the Iraqi people.
ENTITIES:
Mosul: Location, international forces: Organisation, media reports: DocumentReference, Iraqi: Nationality, we: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, ts Iraqi: Vehicle, Iraqi: Nationality, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, we: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, all international forces: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Daesh: Organisation, the Iraqi people: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, all parties: Organisation, the coming days and weeks: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: 340238F0CEF0581CBBA9106FFB2EA97C
TEXT:
Ambassador Robert Ford has completed his consultations in Washington and is returning to Syria. He will continue the work he was doing previously; namely, delivering the United States’ message to the people of Syria; providing reliable reporting on the situation on the ground; and engaging with the full spectrum of Syrian society on how to end the bloodshed and achieve a peaceful political transition. We believe his presence in the country is among the most effective ways to send the message that the United States stands with the people of Syria.
ENTITIES:
Ambassador Robert Ford: Person, Washington: Location, Syria: Location, He: Person, the people of Syria: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syrian: Nationality, he: Person, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, We: Organisation, United States: Location, his: Person, the people of Syria: Organisation, Syria: Location, the country: Location, the United States: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 4174EF50EF8D9024BCC261D602202738
TEXT:
Attribution is on-the-record from Spokesperson John Kirby.

Question: Will the United States participate in the Paris meeting on Syria on October 27, who will attend/at what level, what other details can we provide, etc.?

Answer: Deputy Secretary of State Tony Blinken will travel to Paris for tomorrow’s multilateral meeting, convened by the French government, to discuss efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria.
ENTITIES:
Spokesperson John Kirby: Person, John Kirby: Person, the United States: Organisation, Deputy Secretary of State Tony Blinken: Person, United States: Location, Tony Blinken: Person, Paris: Location, tomorrow: Temporal, the French government: Organisation, French: Nationality, Syria: Location, Paris: Location, Syria: Location, October 27: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: 487C0B93A959D64A34CA2F40EE82C18B
TEXT:
The United States condemns in the strongest terms both the ISIL attack this morning at a crowded market place in Baghdad, and the car bomb attacks in Diyala Province on Monday, as well as other recent terrorist attacks against the Iraqi people. We express our deep condolences to family and friends of the victims. These atrocities show once again the utter disregard ISIL has for innocent civilians, including women and children.

As Iraqis unite against ISIL and turn the tide on the battlefield, ISIL will try to maintain its campaign of terror to sow discord among the Iraqi people. The United States continues to stand shoulder to shoulder with the Iraqi people as they confront ISIL and the violence it represents. We remain committed to working with Prime Minister Al-Abadi, the Iraqi Security Forces, and our partners in the international community to support the Government of Iraq in defeating ISIL and holding this terrorist organization accountable for the atrocities it has committed.
ENTITIES:
The United States: Organisation, Baghdad: Location, Diyala Province: Location, Monday: Temporal, Iraqi: Nationality, people: Organisation, United States: Location, ISIL: Organisation, market place: Location, We: Organisation, to family: Organisation, family and friends of the victims: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the Iraqi people: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, st ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, Iraqis: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, its camp: Location, The United States: Organisation, United States: Location, the Iraqi people: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, ISIL: Organisation, We: Organisation, the international community: Organisation, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, this terrorist organization: Organisation, Prime Minister Al-Abadi: Person, the Iraqi Security Forces: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, our partners: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 6413ED35E27EFB504C689047F2F17B0F
TEXT:
The United States strongly condemns today’s brutal, senseless terrorist attack on Camp Hurriya that killed and injured camp residents. Our condolences go out to the families of the victims, and we hope for the swift recovery of those injured.

We have been in touch with senior Iraqi officials to ensure that the Government of Iraq renders all possible medical and emergency assistance to the victims. We also urge the Government of Iraq to provide additional security for the camp’s residents and to find the perpetrators and hold them accountable for the attack, consistent with its obligations under the December 25, 2011 agreement with the United Nations.

We are consulting with the Government of Iraq to ascertain the full extent of this unprovoked attack.

No matter the circumstances, on this point we remain absolute: the United States remains committed to assisting the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in the relocation of all Camp Hurriya residents to a permanent and safe location outside of Iraq. We call on more countries to assist in responding to this urgent humanitarian situation by welcoming camp residents for relocation and by contributing to the fund established by the United Nations to support their resettlement. The Department, through its Senior Advisor for MEK Resettlement, will remain actively engaged in the international effort to relocate the residents of Camp Hurriya to safe, permanent locations as soon as possible.
ENTITIES:
The United States: Organisation, injured camp: Location, camp residents: Organisation, United States: Location, on Camp: Location, Camp Hurriya: Location, the families: Organisation, the victims: Organisation, we: Organisation, hope: Person, We: Organisation, the victims: Organisation, senior Iraqi officials: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, We: Organisation, the perpetrators: Organisation, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, them: Organisation, its: Organisation, December 25, 2011: Temporal, the United Nations: Organisation, United Nations: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the camp: Location, the camp’s residents: Organisation, We: Organisation, the Government of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees: Person, UN High: Organisation, all Camp: Location, Camp Hurriya: Location, Camp Hurriya residents: Organisation, a permanent and safe location: Location, Iraq: Location, we: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, We: Organisation, camp residents: Organisation, the fund: Organisation, the United Nations: Organisation, United Nations: Organisation, their: Organisation, welcoming camp: Location, The Department: Organisation, the residents of Camp Hurriya: Organisation, of Camp: Location, Camp Hurriya: Location, safe, permanent locations: Location, its Senior Advisor for MEK Resettlement: Person, ts Senior: Vehicle, Department: Organisation, MEK Resettlement: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 6E62DC65EFDFB1B357175EB255F25C36
TEXT:
The United States strongly condemns ISIL’s multiple suicide attacks in the town of Tel Tamer in Hasaka Province, which targeted and killed scores of Syrian civilians, including at a hospital and marketplace. We offer our deepest condolences to the families of the victims of this barbaric act of mass murder. This attack once again displays the type of horrific atrocities that ISIL has perpetrated against tens of thousands of innocent people across Syria and Iraq and affirms the need for international resolve to strengthen those on the ground fighting ISIL.

The United States remains committed to working with our partners in Syria, Iraq, and the international community to bring an end to ISIL’s depravity and ultimately destroy this terrorist organization.
ENTITIES:
The United States: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian civilians: Organisation, a hospital: Location, marketplace: Location, ns ISIL: Vehicle, ISIL: Organisation, United States: Location, suicide attacks: Weapon, the town of Tel Tamer: Location, Tel Tamer: Location, Hasaka Province: Location, We: Organisation, the families of the victims: Organisation, innocent people: Organisation, ss Syria: Vehicle, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, ISIL: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, tens of thousands: Quantity, The United States: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, this terrorist organization: Organisation, United States: Location, our partners: Organisation, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, the international community: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 8EC0382F2D0E4360EC7A85FA8FEA02D8
TEXT:
As Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken announced today at the Manama Dialogue, the United States will provide nearly $100 million in new assistance to the Syrian opposition, bringing the total support we have committed and are providing to the Syrian opposition since 2012 to nearly $500 million.

As part of our steadfast commitment to empower the Syrian opposition, this assistance will support local and provincial councils, civil society activists, emergency first responders, and others to meet the needs of the Syrian people.

U.S. assistance is helping keep schools open for Syrian children; restoring access to electricity and water infrastructure; supporting independent media and civil society to hold their local governments accountable, and building the capacity of the moderate opposition to play a role in a future Syria that respects human rights and the rule of law.

Part of this new assistance includes an additional $15 million contribution to the Syria Recovery Trust Fund (SRTF), which channels donor contributions in a transparent and accountable manner to priority projects inside Syria. With support from 14 donor countries over the last two years, the SRTF is delivering over 20 projects that reach 2 million Syrians in the sectors of health, food security, water, electricity, agriculture, and waste management in areas of moderate opposition control inside Syria.

While our SRTF contribution today will help many, Syrians face significant challenges working to support their communities, and we continue to urge our international partners to contribute and help the SRTF fulfill its important mission.
ENTITIES:
$100 million: Money, the Syrian opposition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, the Syrian opposition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, 2012: Temporal, $500 million: Money, Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken: Person, today: Temporal, the Manama Dialogue: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, our: Organisation, civil society activists: Organisation, emergency first responders: Organisation, others: Organisation, the Syrian people: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, the Syrian opposition: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, local and provincial councils: Organisation, U.S.: Organisation, independent media: Organisation, civil society: Organisation, their local governments: Organisation, local governments: Organisation, city of the: Location, the moderate opposition: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syria: Organisation, schools: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian children: Organisation, children: Organisation, SRTF: Organisation, donor contributions: Money, Syria: Location, $15 million: Money, the Syria Recovery Trust Fund: Organisation, Syria Recovery Trust Fund: Organisation, 2 million: Quantity, Syrians: Organisation, 14: Quantity, donor countries: Organisation, Syria: Location, the SRTF: Organisation, SRTF: Organisation, 20: Quantity, SRTF: Organisation, our international: Organisation, partners: Organisation, the SRTF: Organisation, SRTF: Organisation, today: Temporal, Syrians: Organisation, our: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 9104BDCC8E9A1CD2090757B487421DC6
TEXT:
Knox Thames, the Special Advisor to Ambassador Saperstein for Religious Minorities in the Near East and South and Central Asia, will travel to Turkey November 16 - 17 and to Lebanon November 18 -19.

In Turkey, Special Advisor Thames will deliver remarks on the Department’s work to support religious minorities at the G-20 Interfaith Conference. In Lebanon, Special Advisor Thames will meet with religious and civic leaders to discuss interfaith relations within the Lebanese religious communities and to address the plight of vulnerable religious minority refugee populations coming to Lebanon from Syria and Iraq.
ENTITIES:
Knox Thames: Person, Central Asia: Location, the Special Advisor to Ambassador Saperstein for Religious Minorities in the Near East and South and Central Asia: Person, Turkey: Location, November 16: Temporal, November 16 - 17: Temporal, Lebanon: Location, November 18: Temporal, November 18 -19: Temporal, Ambassador Saperstein: Person, Special Advisor Thames: Person, the G-20 Interfaith Conference: Organisation, Advisor Thames: Organisation, Turkey: Location, the Department: Organisation, religious minorities: Organisation, the Lebanese religious communities: Organisation, Special Advisor Thames: Person, Lebanese: Nationality, religious minority refugee populations: Organisation, Advisor Thames: Organisation, Lebanon: Location, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, Lebanon: Location, religious and civic leaders: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 9DFBD0B607245D1B56B90FD64E9AB952
TEXT:
We condemn in the strongest possible terms terrorist attacks this weekend in Baghdad and Najaf. On Saturday, Dae’sh claimed dual attacks in the commercial area of the Al-Sinek neighborhood in Baghdad which killed at least 28 people. Today, multiple attacks, also claimed by Da’esh, have killed at least 35 more innocent civilians and injured scores of others. We extend our deepest condolences to the families of the victims and hope for a speedy recovery of all those wounded. These vicious acts of mass murder are a sobering reminder of the need to continue coalition operations against Da’esh and to eliminate the threat this terrorist group poses. The U.S. reaffirms its commitment to support the government and people of Iraq in this struggle, and remains steadfast in its commitment to the Global Coalition efforts to degrade and defeat Da’esh.
ENTITIES:
We: Organisation, this weekend: Temporal, Baghdad: Location, Najaf: Location, 28: Quantity, people: Organisation, Dae’sh: Organisation, Dae’sh: Person, Saturday: Temporal, Al-Sinek neighborhood: Location, Baghdad: Location, Today: Temporal, scores of others: Organisation, Da’esh: Organisation, at least 35 more innocent civilians: Organisation, We: Organisation, the families of the victims: Organisation, hope: Person, all those wounded: Organisation, st Da: Vehicle, Da’esh: Organisation, this terrorist group: Organisation, coalition: Organisation, The U.S.: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, Da’esh: Organisation, the government: Organisation, people of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, 

DOCUMENT: B5E6AB37F9BF98EC2A4EFDDACE2768C9
TEXT:
U.S. Secretary of State Kerry and U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter will host foreign and defense ministers of the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL in Washington D.C., on July 21, 2016, for the first joint ministerial of the Counter ISIL Coalition. More than 40 members of the Coalition will assemble to review the campaign to date, and strategize how to further accelerate ISIL’s demise. It will include a detailed discussion of priorities for the Coalition’s multiple lines of effort, including its working groups on political-military coordination, combatting foreign terrorist fighters, counterterrorist financing, counter-messaging, and stabilization of liberated areas, to increase the momentum of the campaign. With the recent liberation of Fallujah and other parts of Anbar Province in Iraq, as well as the advances around Manbij in Syria, this is a key moment to continue to set core ISIL on a lasting, and irreversible, path to defeat. The Coalition’s Small Group regularly meets to synchronize and enhance combined efforts to counter ISIL. The last meeting of Coalition foreign ministers took place in Rome, Italy, on February 2, 2016, and the last meeting of defense ministers took place in Brussels, Belgium, on February 11, 2016.
ENTITIES:
U.S. Secretary of State Kerry: Person, the Global Coalition to Counter ISIL: Organisation, Global Coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Washington: Location, Washington D.C.: Location, July 21, 2016: Temporal, Counter ISIL Coalition: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, Kerry: Person, U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter: Person, Defense Ash Carter: Organisation, foreign and defense ministers: Organisation, 40 members: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, the Coalition: Organisation, Coalition: Organisation, the camp: Location, the camp: Location, the Coalition: Organisation, Manbij: Location, Syria: Location, ISIL: Organisation, Fallujah: Location, other parts of Anbar Province: Location, Anbar Province: Location, Iraq: Location, The Coalition’s Small Group: Organisation, Group: Organisation, ISIL: Organisation, defense ministers: Organisation, Brussels: Location, Brussels, Belgium: Location, Belgium: Location, February 11, 2016: Temporal, Coalition: Organisation, Coalition foreign ministers: Organisation, Rome: Location, Rome, Italy: Location, Italy: Location, February 2, 2016: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: C02FDFE461425ED8B64B982D05BD2D62
TEXT:
QUESTION: There are reports of U.S., German, and Canadian companies hosting Syrian Government websites. Does hosting a Syrian Government website constitute a sanctions violation? What action has the State Department taken to investigate these reports?

ANSWER: U.S. companies are prohibited from providing web-hosting or any other service to the Syrian government under Executive Order 13582 without a license from the Department of the Treasury. We refer questions about pending or ongoing licensure investigations to the Department of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control.

The U.S. government takes all reports of potential sanctions violations seriously. Our policies are designed to assist ordinary citizens who are exercising their fundamental freedoms of expression, assembly and association, while preventing exports of goods and services that repressive regimes can use against their people.
ENTITIES:
U.S., German, and Canadian companies: Organisation, German: Nationality, Canadian: Nationality, Syrian Government: Location, Syrian Government: Organisation, Syrian Government: Location, Syrian Government: Organisation, the State Department: Organisation, State Department: Organisation, Executive Order 13582: DocumentReference, the Department of the Treasury: Organisation, Department of the Treasury: Organisation, U.S. companies: Organisation, the Syrian government: Organisation, Syrian government: Organisation, We: Organisation, Office of Foreign Assets Control: Organisation, the Department of Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control: Organisation, Department of Treasury: Organisation, The U.S. government: Organisation, Our: Organisation, repressive regimes: Organisation, their people: Organisation, ordinary citizens: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: CFEF9B4E83786F435E8483A03DB20D8E
TEXT:
Today, the United States and Iraq signed a loan guarantee agreement that, once entered into force, will enable Iraq to access up to $1 billion in low-cost financing from international capital markets.

The loan guarantee is intended to deliver on President Obama’s pledge at the G7 Ise-Shima Summit in May 2016 and underscores the enduring U.S. commitment to support Iraq, particularly at this critical moment in the fight against Daesh. In addition to facilitating access to essential financing as Iraq addresses multiple humanitarian crises, the guarantee agreement bolsters important economic and institutional reforms aimed at consolidating a foundation for stability and growth. This loan guarantee also reinforces Iraq’s work with other partners, including the International Monetary Fund, to implement its economic reform agenda. This agreement is an important step in the process for Iraq to obtain greater access to international capital markets. After specific legal requirements and policy considerations have been concluded, Iraq will be able to benefit from this U.S. sovereign loan guarantee.

Today’s signing ceremony underscores ongoing U.S. efforts to help all of the people of Iraq create an environment that supports sustainable and inclusive economic growth, encourages investment and creates jobs, and supports expanding economic relations with the United States and the world. As Iraq continues to make progress in implementing this reform agenda, which promises a better future for all Iraqis, it can count on support from its partners in the international community.
ENTITIES:
Today: Temporal, United States: Location, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, $1 billion: Money, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, May 2016: Temporal, U.S.: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, st Daesh: Vehicle, Daesh: Organisation, President Obama: Organisation, President Obama: Person, the G7: Organisation, Ise-Shima: Location, Summit: Location, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, other partners: Organisation, the International Monetary Fund: Organisation, International Monetary Fund: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, U.S.: Organisation, U.S. sovereign loan guarantee: Money, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, U.S.: Organisation, the people of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, all Iraqis: Organisation, it: Organisation, its partners in the international community: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: E1526BBD89FAB8E7914B3CF5867666CC
TEXT:
Today at the Iraqi Museum in Baghdad, the U.S. Embassy Chargé d’Affaires, a.i., Jonathan Cohen and Dr. Ahmed Kamil Murad, Acting General Director of the Office of Museums at the Iraqi Ministry of Culture, State Board of Antiquities and Heritage (SBAH) announced the funding of a project for the rehabilitation and preservation of the Ishtar Gate at the remains of the ancient city of Babylon in Iraq. The U.S. Embassy grant of $530,000 to the World Monuments Fund (WMF) will support conservation work by a team of Iraqi preservationists from the SBAH under the guidance of international heritage experts from WMF. The grant is part of the ongoing cultural partnership between the United States and Iraq in support of the U.S.-Iraq Strategic Framework Agreement.

The rehabilitation of the Ishtar Gate is the most recent cooperative venture of the Future of Babylon project – a partnership from 2009 between the Governments of Iraq and the United States and WMF to support Iraqi efforts to assess, document, and preserve the ancient city located south of Baghdad. Since 2009, the Department of State has contributed more than $4 million to the Future of Babylon. With U.S. support, much of the site has been assessed and documented, emergency stabilization work has been undertaken, and completed a site management plan .

The Ishtar Gate has stood at the entrance to the ancient city since approximately 575 B.C. when it was constructed under King Nebuchadnezzar II. The remaining parts of the structure are in dire need of conservation to stop further deterioration and to correct modern-era modifications that hasten damage to the monument and that are not historically accurate. Work is expected to be completed in 2017.
ENTITIES:
Ahmed: Person, Kamil: Person, Acting General Director of the Office of Museums: Person, Iraqi Museum: Organisation, Office of Museums: Organisation, Iraqi Ministry of Culture: Organisation, State Board of Antiquities: Organisation, State Board of Antiquities and Heritage: Organisation, Heritage (SBAH): Organisation, SBAH: Organisation, Baghdad: Location, the Ishtar Gate: Location, ancient city: Location, city of Babylon: Location, the U.S. Embassy Chargé d’Affaires: Person, Babylon: Location, Iraq: Location, U.S. Embassy Charg: Organisation, Jonathan Cohen: Person, the Iraqi Museum: Location, Dr. Ahmed Kamil Murad: Person, The U.S. Embassy: Organisation, a team of Iraqi preservationists: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the SBAH: Organisation, SBAH: Organisation, grant of $530,000: Money, international heritage experts: Organisation, WMF: Organisation, $530,000: Money, the World Monuments Fund: Organisation, U.S. Embassy: Organisation, World Monuments Fund: Organisation, WMF: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, 2009: Temporal, the Governments of Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the United States: Organisation, United States: Location, WMF: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the Ishtar Gate: Location, the ancient city: Location, ancient city: Location, Baghdad: Location, the Future of Babylon project: Organisation, Babylon: Location, Since 2009: Temporal, the Department of State: Organisation, Department of State: Organisation, more than $4 million: Money, 2009: Temporal, $4 million: Money, the Future of Babylon: Organisation, Babylon: Location, the site: Location, U.S.: Organisation, The Ishtar Gate: Location, King Nebuchadnezzar II: Person, the entrance to the ancient city: Location, the ancient city: Location, ancient city: Location, 575 B.C: Temporal, 2017: Temporal, 

DOCUMENT: F669C19A4C3DB410BBEC57ECC5DC62B1
TEXT:
Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken will travel to Iraq to discuss key political, economic, and security issues with government officials.

In Baghdad on November 22, Deputy Secretary Blinken will meet with national and provincial Iraqi officials to discuss a range of economic and security issues. He will also meet with senior U.S. military officials to discuss our ongoing support for the Iraqi Armed Forces, Popular Mobilization Forces, and others in support of the coalition campaign against Daesh.

Deputy Secretary Blinken will then visit the Iraqi Kurdistan Region on November 23, where he will meet with senior regional government officials to continue discussions on our efforts to degrade and defeat Daesh as well as our response to the urgent humanitarian and refugee crises in Iraq.

Be sure to follow the Deputy Secretary on Twitter (@ABlinken) and on the State Department’s Flickr and Instagram for more updates throughout his trip.
ENTITIES:
Deputy Secretary of State Antony Blinken: Person, government officials: Organisation, Iraq: Location, November 22: Temporal, Deputy Secretary Blinken: Person, Baghdad: Location, national and provincial Iraqi officials: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, He: Person, Popular Mobilization Forces: Organisation, others: Organisation, the coalition: Organisation, coalition camp: Location, st Daesh: Vehicle, Daesh: Organisation, senior U.S. military officials: Organisation, the Iraqi Armed Forces: Organisation, Iraqi Armed Forces: Organisation, Deputy Secretary Blinken: Person, senior regional government officials: Organisation, Daesh: Organisation, Iraq: Location, the Iraqi Kurdistan Region: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Kurdistan Region: Location, November 23: Temporal, he: Person, the Deputy Secretary: Person, @ABlinken: CommsIdentifier, ABlinken: CommsIdentifier, State Department: Organisation, State Department’s Flickr: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: FAB032C0995F606F54B1DD3EA8D61930
TEXT:
QUESTION: Secretary Kerry, did you discuss Aleppo? Were there any agreements?

SECRETARY KERRY: We obviously talked about the extraordinarily dire situation in Aleppo and we exchanged some ideas about it, and we intend to connect in the morning to see where we are on it.

MR KIRBY: Thanks, everybody. Thank you.
ENTITIES:
Secretary Kerry: Person, Kerry: Person, ss Aleppo: Vehicle, Aleppo: Location, SECRETARY KERRY: Person, KERRY: Person, we: Organisation, the morning: Temporal, We: Organisation, we: Organisation, Aleppo: Location, we: Organisation, MR KIRBY: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 0388FEF6427DE0223688EB04A8DA71E1
TEXT:
Hibhib (Arabic: ناحية هبهب‎‎, Hibhib Village) is a village in northern Iraq, located 8 km (5.0 mi) northwest of Baquba. It is predominately Shia Arab.[1]
The former leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq, Jordanian-born militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, maintained a safehouse in the village. In 2006, while meeting in the safehouse with his spiritual adviser, he was bombed and killed by U.S.-led coalition aircraft.[2]
Coordinates: 33°47′N 44°30′E / 33.783°N 44.500°E / 33.783; 44.500

ENTITIES:
Hibhib: Location, Baquba: Location, Hibhib Village: Location, northern Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Arabic: Nationality, 8 km: Quantity, 5.0 mi: Quantity, Shia: Nationality, Shia Arab: Nationality, Arab: Nationality, The former leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq: Person, the village: Location, Al Qaeda: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Jordanian: Nationality, Abu Musab: Person, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi: Person, a safehouse: Location, 33°47′N 44°30′E: Coordinate, 33°47′N 44°30′E: Location, 33.783°N 44.500°E: Coordinate, 33.783°N 44.500°E: Location, 33.783; 44.500: Location, the safehouse: Location, 2006: Temporal, his spiritual adviser: Person, he: Person, U.S.-led: Location, U.S.-led coalition aircraft: MilitaryPlatform, 

DOCUMENT: 051A4176702090F39056F34A9C29D574
TEXT:
The Brandbergen Mosque, officially the Islamic Association in Brandbergen is a mosque located in Brandbergen, Haninge Municipality, south of Stockholm, Sweden.
"In 2004 an Arabic-language manual, which carried the logo and address of the Brandbergen Mosque, was spread on the internet. The manual described the construction of simple chemical weapons, including how to build a chemical munition from an ordinary artillery round.[1] On December 7, 2006, the Swedish citizen Mohamed Moumou, who is described by the United States Department of the Treasury as an ""uncontested leader of an extremist group centered around the Brandbergen Mosque in Stockholm"", was put on the United Nations Security Council Committee 1267 list of foreign terrorists.[2]"
In November 2006 the Islamic Association got permission to build a Muslim Cultural Center next to the city center. The cultural center will include an assembly hall, library, restaurant, gyms and baths.[3] It is meant to serve as a meeting place for the area's Muslims, as well as other residents.[4]
Coordinates: 59°10′25″N 18°10′05″E / 59.173616°N 18.167988°E / 59.173616; 18.167988

ENTITIES:
The Brandbergen Mosque: Location, south of Stockholm, Sweden: Location, Stockholm: Location, Sweden: Location, the Islamic Association in Brandbergen: Organisation, Islamic Association: Organisation, a mosque: Location, Brandbergen: Location, Brandbergen, Haninge Municipality: Location, Arabic: Nationality, Arabic-language manual: DocumentReference, 2004: Temporal, logo: DocumentReference, the Brandbergen Mosque: Location, The manual: DocumentReference, an ordinary artillery round: Weapon, simple chemical weapons: Weapon, a chemical munition: Weapon, Treasury: Organisation, an extremist group: Organisation, an extremist group centered around the Brandbergen Mosque in Stockholm: Organisation, the Brandbergen Mosque: Location, the Swedish citizen Mohamed Moumou: Person, Stockholm: Location, the United Nations Security Council Committee: Organisation, the United Nations Security Council Committee 1267: Organisation, the United Nations Security Council Committee 1267 list: DocumentReference, the United Nations Security Council Committee 1267 list of foreign terrorists: Temporal, United Nations Security Council Committee: Organisation, Swedish: Nationality, December 7, 2006: Temporal, Mohamed Moumou: Person, the United States Department of the Treasury: Organisation, United States: Location, the Islamic Association: Organisation, Islamic Association: Organisation, November 2006: Temporal, a Muslim Cultural Center: Location, Muslim: Nationality, the city: Location, the city center: Location, The cultural center: Location, assembly hall: Location, library: Location, restaurant: Location, gyms: Location, baths: Location, a meeting place: Location, the area's Muslims: Organisation, other residents: Organisation, 59°10′25″N 18°10′05″E: Coordinate, 59°10′25″N 18°10′05″E: Location, 59.173616°N 18.167988°E: Coordinate, 59.173616°N 18.167988°E: Location, 59.173616; 18.167988: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 22BCFA25729AF03473435DAAAE67F5B8
TEXT:
The Syrian Computer Society is an organization in Syria. It was founded by Bassel al-Assad in 1989, and was subsequently headed by his brother Bashar al-Assad,[1] who would later become the President of Syria. It acts as Syria's domain name registration authority and has been reported to be closely associated with the Syrian state.[2]
"In May 2013, 700 domains registered by Syrians, mostly hosted at servers with IP addresses assigned to the Syrian Computer Society,[3] were reported to have been seized by the U.S. DNS infrastructure operator Network Solutions.[2] The domain names were marked as ""OFAC Holding"", believed to be a reference to the U.S. federal government's Office of Foreign Assets Control.[3]"
Some members of the Syrian Computer Society belonged to the first group of supporters of the Syrian Electronic Army.[4]

ENTITIES:
The Syrian Computer Society: Organisation, Syrian Computer Society: Organisation, Syria: Location, It: Organisation, the President of Syria: Person, President of: Person, Syria: Location, Bassel al-Assad: Person, Assad: Person, 1989: Temporal, brother Bashar al-Assad: Person, Bashar al-Assad: Person, It: Organisation, the Syrian state: Organisation, Syria: Location, Syrian: Nationality, May 2013: Temporal, 700 domains: Quantity, Syrians: Organisation, IP: Organisation, the Syrian Computer Society: Organisation, Syrian Computer Society: Organisation, U.S. DNS infrastructure operator Network Solutions: Organisation, Network Solutions: Organisation, Office of Foreign Assets Control.[3: Organisation, OFAC: Organisation, the U.S. federal government's Office of Foreign Assets Control: Organisation, Some members: Organisation, the Syrian Computer Society: Organisation, Syrian Computer Society: Organisation, the Syrian Electronic Army: Organisation, Syrian Electronic Army.[4: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 2B0DB9AA5ACC73214D2C69C20AA734A8
TEXT:
Abboud Qanbar(Arabic: ‎‎ عبود قنبر), also known as Abu Haidar,[1] is an Iraqi General. On January 13, 2007, he was appointed by Prime Minister Nouri Maliki as the Iraqi commander for the Baghdad Operational Command, which controls all Iraqi security forces in Baghdad and is charged with securing the capital. His Chief of Staff is Major General Hassan, and his Chief of Plans is Staff Colonel Abd Alamir. He hails from Amarah, a city in Southern Iraq.
Qanbar was a commander in the navy during Saddam Hussein's reign, and took part in the Iran-Iraq War of 1980-88, and the war over Kuwait in 1990-91. In the latter, he commanded a garrison on the Kuwaiti island of Failaka, and was taken prisoner by U.S. Marines. He was a brigadier general in the navy during the 1991 Gulf War. After being captured in Fialaka, he was briefly transferred to Saudi Arabia before his release. Despite being captured by American forces, Qanbar was later decorated by Saddam for his bravery in defense of the island.[2] After the war, Qanbar was posted in Basra, but was excluded from new commands after he refused to stop the 1991 Shiite uprising.[1]
He was appointed by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki to lead the 2007 Baghdad crackdown in February 2007, though he was considered a relatively unknown officer.[3] Qanbar was a compromise choice after the U.S. military rejected Maliki's first choice, Mohan al-Freiji.[2] Qanbar announced the details of the new security plan on live Iraqi television on February 13.[4]

ENTITIES:
Abboud Qanbar: Person, Arabic: Nationality, Abu Haidar: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Baghdad: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi security forces: Organisation, Baghdad: Location, he: Person, January 13, 2007: Temporal, Prime Minister Nouri Maliki: Person, the Iraqi commander: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, the Baghdad Operational Command: Organisation, He: Person, he: Person, 3: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki: Person, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki: Person, 2007: Temporal, Baghdad: Location, February 2007: Temporal, Qanbar: Person, Qanbar: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi television: Organisation, February 13: Temporal, the U.S. military: Organisation, Maliki: Person, Mohan al-Freiji: Person, His Chief of Staff: Person, Major General Hassan: Person, Hassan: Person, his Chief of Plans: Person, Staff Colonel Abd Alamir: Person, He: Person, Amarah: Location, a city: Location, Southern Iraq: Location, Qanbar: Person, 1980-88: Temporal, Kuwait: Location, 1990-91: Temporal, the navy: Organisation, Saddam Hussein: Person, Iran: Location, Iran: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Organisation, he: Person, a garrison on the Kuwaiti island of Failaka: Location, Kuwaiti: Nationality, Failaka: Location, U.S. Marines: Organisation, He: Person, the navy: Organisation, 1991: Temporal, Fialaka: Location, he: Person, Saudi Arabia: Location, the island: Location, American: Nationality, American forces: Organisation, Qanbar: Person, Saddam: Person, his: Person, 1991: Temporal, Shiite: Nationality, Qanbar: Person, Basra: Location, new commands: Organisation, he: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 2ED27E1CBF9EFDEF369E721DC948D2F4
TEXT:
Samarra Barrage (Arabic: سد سامَرّاء‎‎) and Tharthar Barrage (Arabic: سد الثَرثار‎‎) is a multi-purpose barrage on the Tigris River adjacent (west) of Samarra and north of Baghdad, Iraq. The main purpose of the dam is to divert floodwater in the Tigris River to Lake Tharthar through the Tharthar depression along with irrigation and an 84 MW hydro-electricity station. It also serves to produce hydroelectric power and flood control – although the later has become less critical with the construction of the Mosul Dam upstream and several other large dams in Turkey.
It was completed in 1956 by the German company Züblin. Designs were completed by the British firm Voganlei and Coode. The power station was commissioned in 1972. The Samarra Barrage portion of the structure has 17 gates capable of passing 7,000 m3/s (247,203 cu ft/s) of water to the Tigris while the Tharthar regulator can divert up to 9,000 m3/s (317,832 cu ft/s) into a canal with 36 gates. The reservoir's design capacity is 150,000,000 m3 (121,607 acre·ft) but much of that is filled with sediment.[1][2]
The intent was to use water stored from the Samarra Barrage and the Ramadi Barrage for irrigation. However, evaporation on Lakes Habbaniyah and Tharthar lead to reduces storage and high salinity; conditions unsuitable for irrigation.[3]
In April 2015 the Tharthar Barrage was captured by The Islamic State after several days of fighting that saw 120 Iraqi soldiers and a senior Iraqi general killed. The jihadist group also took over a nearby military barracks during the battle.[4]

ENTITIES:
Samarra Barrage: Location, Samarra: Location, the Tigris River: Location, Tigris River: Location, Samarra: Location, Arabic: Nationality, Baghdad: Location, Baghdad, Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Tharthar Barrage: Location, Arabic: Nationality, 84 MW: Quantity, hydro-electricity station: Location, the dam: Location, the Tigris River: Location, Tigris River: Location, Lake Tharthar: Location, the Tharthar depression: Location, 120 Iraqi soldiers: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, a senior Iraqi general: Person, the Tharthar Barrage: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, April 2015: Temporal, The: Organisation, The Islamic State: Organisation, Islamic State: Organisation, The jihadist group: Organisation, military barracks: Location, the Mosul Dam: Location, Mosul: Location, dams in Turkey: Location, Turkey: Location, 1956: Temporal, German: Nationality, Züblin: Organisation, the British firm Voganlei and Coode: Organisation, British: Nationality, The power station: Location, 1972: Temporal, The Samarra Barrage: Location, the Tigris: Location, Tigris: Location, the Tharthar regulator: Location, 9,000 m3/s: Quantity, 317,832 cu ft/s: Quantity, a canal: Location, 36 gates: Location, gates: Person, the structure: Location, Samarra: Location, 17: Quantity, 17 gates: Location, gates: Person, 7,000 m3/s: Quantity, m3/s: Location, 247,203 cu ft/s: Quantity, The reservoir: Location, 150,000,000 m3: Quantity, 121,607 acre·ft: Quantity, the Samarra Barrage: Location, Samarra: Location, the Ramadi Barrage: Location, Ramadi: Location, Lakes Habbaniyah and Tharthar: Location, 

DOCUMENT: 3B6F5E49DF05198FD982806C6CA1591C
TEXT:
Abu Ghadiya (Arabic: أبو غادية‎‎), born Badran Turki Hishan al-Mazidi (Arabic: بدران تركي هيشان المزيدي‎‎) sometime between 1977-1979 in Mosul, was a Sunni militant active with al-Qaeda in Iraq (AQI). He was primarily involved in the logistics of AQI's effort in Iraq and assisted in smuggling weapons, money and fighters across the Syria-Iraq border. He was targeted and killed in a cross-border raid conducted by the U.S. military on October 26, 2008.[1][2]
According to the United States Treasury Department, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi appointed Abu Ghadiya the lead Syrian commander for AQI's logistics in 2004. After Zarqawi's death, Ghadiya took orders from his successor, Abu Ayyub Al-Masri, either directly or through a deputy. Abu Ghadiya provided false passports, safe houses, weapons and money to militants on the Syrian side of the Iraqi border before the fighters would cross into Iraq.[3]
Ghadiya was killed in a 2008 raid by US Special Operations inside Syrian territory.[4]

ENTITIES:
Abu Ghadiya: Person, Abu: Person, 1977: Temporal, 1977-1979: Temporal, 1979: Temporal, Arabic: Nationality, Mosul: Location, Sunni: Nationality, al-Qaeda: Organisation, al-Qaeda in Iraq: Organisation, Iraq: Location, AQI: Organisation, Badran Turki Hishan al-Mazidi: Person, Arabic: Nationality, He: Person, money: Money, fighters: Organisation, the Syria-Iraq border: Location, Syria: Location, Iraq: Location, AQI: Organisation, Iraq: Location, weapons: Weapon, He: Person, the U.S. military: Organisation, October 26, 2008: Temporal, Syrian: Nationality, AQI: Organisation, AQI's logistics: Organisation, the United States Treasury Department: Organisation, 2004: Temporal, United States: Location, Treasury Department: Organisation, Abu Musab: Person, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi: Person, Abu: Person, Abu Ghadiya: Person, the lead Syrian commander for AQI's logistics: Person, Ghadiya: Person, Zarqawi: Person, Abu Ayyub Al-Masri: Person, Abu Ghadiya: Person, Abu: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, the fighters: Organisation, Iraq: Location, weapons: Weapon, money: Money, the Syrian side of the Iraqi border: Location, Syrian: Nationality, Ghadiya: Person, 2008: Temporal, US Special Operations: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian territory: Location, 4: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 76F75D985AD7642B43A8AA4DBC146621
TEXT:
Ziad Khalaf al-Karbouly (زياد خلف الكربولي; died 4 February 2015) a native of Al-Qa'im, was an Islamist[1] former Iraqi officer and the son of an Iraqi tribal sheikh of the Al-Karabla clan of the Dulaim.
He was captured by Jordanian 71st Counter Terrorism Battalion with the aid of Jordanian intelligence officers in May 2006, and accused of being Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's assistant which Karbouly denied.[2] Karbouly told the tribunal that he was “innocent”. He also disputed the prosecution’s version that he was captured inside Iraq in a joint operation of the Jordanian army and intelligence on 10 May. He told the tribunal that he was instead kidnapped “from Lebanon on May 6.”[3]
On 23 May 2006, he admitted that he had abducted and killed citizens from Jordan and Iraq, and had abducted two Moroccans in October 2005.[4][5]
He was sentenced to death, and along with failed suicide bomber Sajida Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi, was hanged on 4 February 2015, expedited in retaliation for the burning of Royal Jordanian Air Force lieutenant Muath al-Kasasbeh by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.[1]

ENTITIES:
Ziad Khalaf al-Karbouly: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, an Iraqi tribal sheikh: Person, Iraqi: Nationality, the Al-Karabla clan: Organisation, the Dulaim: Organisation,  : Person, 4 February 2015: Temporal, Al-Qa'im: Location, He: Person, May 2006: Temporal, Abu: Person, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi: Person, Karbouly: Person, Jordanian: Nationality, Jordanian 71st Counter Terrorism Battalion: Organisation, Karbouly: Person, 71st: Quantity, st Counter: Vehicle, Jordanian intelligence officers: Organisation, Jordanian: Nationality, He: Person, the Jordanian army and intelligence: Organisation, Jordanian: Nationality, 10 May: Temporal, May: Person, the prosecution: Organisation, he: Person, Iraq: Location, He: Person, he: Person, citizens from Jordan and Iraq: Organisation, Jordan: Person, Iraq: Location, two Moroccans: Organisation, October 2005: Temporal, he: Person, Lebanon: Location, May: Person, May 6: Temporal, the tribunal: Organisation, 23 May 2006: Temporal, he: Person, He: Person, 4 February 2015: Temporal, Royal Jordanian Air Force: Organisation, lieutenant Muath al-Kasasbeh: Person, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant: Organisation, Sajida Mubarak Atrous: Person, Sajida Mubarak Atrous al-Rishawi: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 774684266A20284937043C2BC997EC3B
TEXT:
"Jaish al-Ta'ifa al-Mansurah (Arabic: جيش الطائفة المنصورة‎‎ Jaysh aṭ-Ṭā’ifa al-Manṣūrah, ""Army of the Victorious Sect"") is a militant Sunni group known to take part in the Iraqi insurgency. The group was founded by Sheikh Abu Omar al-Ansari."
On January 15, 2006, the umbrella organization known as the Mujahideen Shura Council announced its formation. The Army of the Victorious Sect was announced as one of its constituent groups, along with al-Qaeda in Iraq, Monotheism Supporters Brigades, Saray al-Jihad Group, al-Ghuraba Brigades, and al-Ahwal Brigades.
They claim attacks against Shi'ite civilians on a regular basis[citation needed] and once claimed responsibility for an attack on what it claimed were Badr and Interior Ministry officers in the Doura district of Baghdad using police commando uniforms and official ministry vehicles. They kidnapped and killed 11 people, including one hostage who was beheaded.

ENTITIES:
Jaish al-Ta'ifa al-Mansurah: Organisation, a militant Sunni group: Organisation, Sunni: Nationality, the Iraqi insurgency: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Arabic: Nationality, Army of the Victorious Sect: Organisation, Army: Organisation, The group: Organisation, Sheikh Abu Omar: Person, Sheikh Abu Omar al-Ansari: Person, the umbrella organization known as the Mujahideen Shura Council: Organisation, January 15, 2006: Temporal, Mujahideen Shura Council: Organisation, The Army of the Victorious Sect: Organisation, Iraq: Location, Monotheism Supporters Brigades: Organisation, Saray al-Jihad Group: Organisation, Jihad: Person, Group: Organisation, al-Ghuraba Brigades: Organisation, al-Ahwal Brigades: Organisation, Army: Organisation, its: Organisation, al-Qaeda in Iraq: Organisation, al-Qaeda: Organisation, They: Organisation, it: Organisation, Badr: Organisation, Badr: Person, Interior Ministry: Organisation, Interior Ministry officers: Organisation, Doura district of Baghdad: Location, Baghdad: Location, st Shi: Vehicle, official ministry vehicles: MilitaryPlatform, Shi'ite civilians: Organisation, They: Organisation, 11 people: Organisation, one hostage: Person, 

DOCUMENT: 7EA8D40D4CBE1191B91C9B3503A07338
TEXT:
Operation Steel Curtain (Arabic: الحجاب الفولاذي Al Hejab Elfulathi) was a military operation executed by coalition forces in early November 2005 to reduce the flow of foreign insurgents crossing the border and joining the Iraqi insurgency. The operation was important in that it was the first large scale deployment of the New Iraqi Army. This offensive was part of the larger Operation Sayeed (Hunter), designed to prevent al Qaeda in Iraq from operating in the Euphrates River Valley and throughout Al Anbar and to establish a permanent Iraqi Army presence in the Al Qa’im region.
"On 5 November, Marines from 3rd Battalion, 6th Marines and 2nd Battalion, 1st Marines began their assault on insurgent-held Karabilah, and had cleared the city four days later. Then on 10 November the coalition forces began to attack the city of Husaybah and pursue any insurgents who fled Karabilah. After four more days of fighting in Husaybah, the coalition troops launched another phase of the operation into the city of Ubaydi, an insurgent haven and site of the earlier Operation Matador. The fortified city fell to coalition forces after seven days of fighting, bringing a conclusion to Operation Steel Curtain. The assault on Sadah and a small portion of Karabilah was known as ""Operation: Iron Fist"". The assault of Husaybah and Karabilah was ""Operation: Steel Curtain"". So named because the resident leader of anti-coalition forces, al-Zarqawi, said they would hold on to Husaybah with an ""iron fist"". Named by Coalition Commanders, ""Operation Steel Curtain"", was a hardened sweep and clear mission hence ""steel curtain"" because one of the SNCOs was a Pittsburgh Steelers fan."
U.S. officials reported that the operation killed 139 insurgents and took 256 more prisoners, and considered it successful. Battle positions were constructed, preventing the insurgency from regaining control of the city. At least 10 U.S. Marines and an unknown number of Iraqi soldiers died.[3][4][5] A local physician from Husaybah, Zahid Mohammed Rawi, said that medical workers had counted 97 civilians killed in the first week of the operation.[2]

ENTITIES:
Operation Steel Curtain: Organisation, coalition forces: Organisation, early November 2005: Temporal, foreign insurgents: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Arabic: Nationality, Al Hejab Elfulathi: Person, the New Iraqi Army: Organisation, New Iraqi Army: Organisation, one of the SNCOs: Person, Pittsburgh Steelers: Organisation, fan: Person, Coalition Commanders: Organisation, U.S. officials: Organisation, 139: Quantity, insurgents: Organisation, 256: Quantity, prisoners: Organisation, Battle positions: Location, the insurgency: Organisation, the city: Location, At least 10: Quantity, U.S. Marines: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi soldiers: Organisation, A local physician: Person, the first week: Temporal, Husaybah: Location, Zahid Mohammed Rawi: Person, medical workers: Organisation, 97 civilians: Organisation, the Euphrates River Valley: Location, Euphrates River Valley: Location, Al Anbar: Location, Iraqi: Nationality, Iraqi Army: Organisation, Army: Organisation, the Al Qa’im region: Location, Hunter: Person, al Qaeda in Iraq: Organisation, al Qaeda: Organisation, Iraq: Location, insurgent-held Karabilah: Location, the city: Location, Marines: Organisation, Marines from 3rd Battalion, 6th Marines and 2nd Battalion, 1st Marines: Organisation, four days later: Temporal, 5 November: Temporal, Marines: Organisation, 1st: Quantity, st Marines: Vehicle, Karabilah: Location, the coalition forces: Organisation, the city: Location, the city of Husaybah: Location, 10 November: Temporal, insurgents: Organisation, the city: Location, the city of Ubaydi: Location, Husaybah: Location, the coalition troops: Organisation, four more days: Temporal, The fortified city: Location, The fort: Location, coalition forces: Organisation, fortified city: Location, seven days: Temporal, Operation Steel Curtain: Organisation, Sadah: Location, Karabilah: Location, Husaybah: Location, Karabilah: Location, Husaybah: Location, the resident leader of anti-coalition forces: Person, al-Zarqawi: Person, they: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: 99036C6E6DB96D33FA0830D3095E7B71
TEXT:
The Hamrin Mountains (Arabic: جبل حمرين Jabāl Hamrīn, Kurdish: Çiyayê Hemrîn or Çiyayên Hemrîn) are a small mountain ridge in northeast Iraq. The westernmost ripple of the greater Zagros mountains,[1] the Hamrin mountains extend from the Diyala Province bordering Iran, northwest to the Tigris river, crossing northern Salah ad Din Province and southern Kirkuk Province.
In antiquity, the mountains were part of the frontier region between Babylonia to the south and Assyria to the north. Today, the area forms part of the linguistic boundary between most of Arabic-speaking Iraq and Kurdish-speaking Iraq.
Coordinates: 35°01′57″N 43°38′47″E / 35.0325°N 43.6463889°E / 35.0325; 43.6463889

ENTITIES:
The Hamrin Mountains: Location, a small mountain ridge: Location, northeast Iraq: Location, st Iraq: Vehicle, Arabic: Nationality, Hamrin Mountains: Location, Kurdish: Nationality, The westernmost ripple of the greater Zagros mountains: Location, Iran: Location, the Tigris river: Location, Tigris: Location, Tigris river: Location, northern Salah ad Din: Location, northern Salah ad Din Province: Location, Salah: Person, Din Province: Location, southern Kirkuk Province: Location, Kirkuk Province: Location, Zagros mountains: Location, the Hamrin mountains: Location, Hamrin mountains: Location, the Diyala Province: Location, Diyala Province: Location, the mountains: Location, the frontier region: Location, Babylonia: Location, Assyria: Location, Today: Temporal, Iraq: Location, Arabic: Nationality, Arabic-speaking: Nationality, Arabic-speaking Iraq: Location, Iraq: Location, Kurdish: Nationality, Kurdish-speaking: Nationality, Kurdish-speaking Iraq: Location, 35°01′57″N 43°38′47″E: Coordinate, 35°01′57″N 43°38′47″E: Location, 35.0325°N 43.6463889°E: Coordinate, 35.0325°N 43.6463889°E: Location, 35.0325; 43.6463889: Location, 

DOCUMENT: B7CAC5946BE12615BA4815FFE0FE4C54
TEXT:
Alsumaria News (Arabic: السومرية نيوز‎‎) is an independent Iraqi satellite TV network that transmits on Nilesat, Hotbird, and Noorsat/Eurobird. Established by a group of professional businessmen in 2004, it has 700 employees across Iraq, Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates and Jordan.
Alsumaria adopts a Liberal perspective whilst maintaining religious faith and strongly refuting repression and autocracy. Alsumaria produces almost all of its 24/7 programs in-house. It broadcasts live entertainment, social, political, and game shows hosted by young Iraqis, and drama and comedy series starred, directed and produced by Iraqis.
Alsumaria have exclusive rights to broadcast movies, documentaries, musicals, children, entertainment, and sports shows.
Terrestrial broadcasting 64 UHF  NileSat 102. Frequency: 12130 MHZ Polarization: Vertical Symbol rate: 27.5 Mb/s FEC: 5/6  HotBird 8 - 13° East Transponder: 77 Frequency: 12.245 MHz Polarization: Horizontal Symbol Rate: 27.500 M Symbol FEC: 3/4
It is available for an Arab audience throughout the world via satellite, online streaming through its website and in the Americas on myTV.[1]

ENTITIES:
Alsumaria News: Organisation, Nilesat: Organisation, Hotbird: Organisation, Noorsat: Organisation, Eurobird: Organisation, Arabic: Nationality, السومرية نيوز: Organisation, Iraqi: Nationality, the United Arab Emirates: Location, United Arab Emirates: Location, Jordan: Location, a group of professional businessmen: Organisation, 2004: Temporal, it: Organisation, 700: Quantity, 700 employees: Organisation, employees: Organisation, ss Iraq: Vehicle, Iraq: Location, Lebanon: Location, Alsumaria: Person, faith: Person, Alsumaria: Organisation, It: Organisation, Iraqis: Organisation, young Iraqis: Organisation, Alsumaria: Organisation, 64 UHF  NileSat 102: Frequency, UHF: Organisation, 12130 MHZ: Frequency, 12.245 MHz: Frequency, 27.500 M: Quantity, an Arab audience: Organisation, Arab: Nationality, the Americas: Location, myTV: Organisation, st Transponder: Vehicle, 

DOCUMENT: BC4D46232E91E65C8C69F4F6F2D9C618
TEXT:
Al Assad University Hospital in Damascus is one of the largest teaching hospitals in Syria. It was founded in 1988 and is run by the Ministry of Higher Education. The hospital is affiliated with Damascus University.[1][2]
The hospital has facilities for MRI and CT scan, a gamma camera and lithotripsy device.
The operations ward contains 11 operation rooms suitable for laparoscopic and open heart surgery as well as computerized neurosurgery.
Analyses performed by the hospital lab include hormonal, immune, tumor, pharmaceutical, and lymphatic tests/ It has a stem cell bank.
The hospital provides medical, therapeutic and surgical services to patients. It is used to train students and graduate doctors from Syrian universities and contributes to scientific research.
Hospital activities include internal specialties, including cardiac, neurological, gastrointestinal and kidney. It also performs general, endoscopic, vascular and cardiac surgery, neurosurgery and urosurgery. It has a kidney transplant unit and a physiotherapy unit.
The hospital contains 645 beds, 36 of which are for intensive care, and has a special emergency ward for internal diseases.[3]
Coordinates: 33°30′21″N 36°16′11″E / 33.505716°N 36.269635°E / 33.505716; 36.269635

ENTITIES:
Al Assad University Hospital: Location, Assad University Hospital: Organisation, Damascus: Location, Syria: Location, It: Organisation, 1988: Temporal, the Ministry of Higher Education: Organisation, Ministry of Higher Education: Organisation, It: Location, a physiotherapy unit: Location, a kidney transplant unit : Location, The hospital: Location, 645 beds: Quantity, 36: Quantity, 33°30′21″N 36°16′11″E: Coordinate, 33°30′21″N 36°16′11″E: Location, 33.505716°N 36.269635°E: Coordinate, 33.505716°N 36.269635°E: Location, 33.505716; 36.269635: Location, The hospital: Location, Damascus University: Organisation, The hospital: Location, MRI: Organisation, The operations ward: Location, 11: Quantity, It: Organisation, the hospital lab: Organisation, The hospital: Location, patients: Organisation, students: Organisation, graduate doctors: Organisation, Syrian: Nationality, Syrian universities: Organisation, Hospital: Location, It: Organisation, 

DOCUMENT: FD93899C448B33796DBBB7BBFEEFA3A6
TEXT:
The Yazidi Book of Revelation (Kitêba Cilwe in Kurdish; also transliterated as Kitab Al Jilwah) is one of two books on the Yazidi religion written in the style of a holy book in the Kurmanji dialect of the Northern Kurdish language, the other being the Yazidi Black Book (Mishefa Reş in Kurdish).[1] It is claimed that the original text of the Book of Revelation is kept in the Yazidi village of Ba'idn and the original text of the Yazidi Black Book is kept in the village of Qasr 'tzz at-Din.[2]
Scholars generally agree that the Book of Revelation and the Black Book, which were published in English translation in 1911 and 1913, respectively, are 'forgeries' in the sense they were written by non-Yazidis in response to Western travelers’ and scholars’ interest in the Yazidi religion. Nonetheless they do reflect authentic Yazidi traditions.[3]
The actual core texts of the religion that exist today are the hymns known as qewl.[3]
The Book of Revelation contains five chapters in order of decreasing length. In all five chapters of this book, the words of God are given in the first person, in contrast to the Black Book, which records the acts of God in the third person.
"Chapter one of the Book of Revelation discusses the Yazidi doctrine of the nature of God, who is made to declare that he is the author of what ""outsiders call evils"". The rest of the chapter deals with the exercise of divine power."
Chapter two describes the omnipotence of God.
Chapter three treats of the omnipotence of God, and begins with the statement that God guides without a scripture.
"Chapter four contains a warning against outsiders, and enunciates a doctrine concerning the ""corruption"" of holy books very similar to that of the Muslims."
Chapter five is a short exhortation to the faithful.

ENTITIES:
The Yazidi Book of Revelation: DocumentReference, two books: DocumentReference, Yazidi: Nationality, Kurmanji: Nationality, Northern Kurdish: Nationality, Northern Kurdish: Organisation, the Yazidi Black Book: DocumentReference, Yazidi: Nationality, Kurdish: Nationality, Yazidi: Nationality, Kurdish: Nationality, Kitab Al Jilwah: DocumentReference, text: Organisation, the Yazidi Black Book: DocumentReference, Yazidi: Nationality, the village of Qasr 'tzz at-Din: Location, Qasr: Location, the Book of Revelation: DocumentReference, the Black Book: DocumentReference, English: Nationality, 1911: Temporal, text: Organisation, 1913: Temporal,  the Book of Revelation: DocumentReference, non-Yazidis: Nationality, the Book of Revelation: DocumentReference, Yazidis: Nationality, Western travelers’ and scholars: Organisation, Yazidi: Nationality, the Yazidi village of Ba'idn: Location, Yazidi: Nationality, Ba'id: Location, Chapter four: DocumentReference, holy books: DocumentReference, Muslims: Nationality, Chapter five: DocumentReference, they: Organisation, Yazidi: Nationality, core texts of the religion: DocumentReference, the hymns known as qewl: DocumentReference, The Book of Revelation: DocumentReference, five: Quantity, chapters: DocumentReference, all five chapters of this book: DocumentReference, the Black Book: DocumentReference, Chapter one of the Book of Revelation: DocumentReference, Yazidi: Nationality, the chapter: DocumentReference, Chapter two: DocumentReference, Chapter three: DocumentReference, 

